# Chapter Eighteen: On the Way to the Big Island, Hilo, Hawaii - Till the End of the War

There was a transport docked near the Wasp and we were ordered to board that ship for our transportation to Hilo Hawaii, where we would be for the next 4 months waiting for our carrier for combat and would be training everyday. I don’t remember the name of the ship, but it was like the ships that would transport supplies and people to the combat areas. The ship was quite large and it took only 8 hours to get to Hilo.

Hilo was called the big island and was located on the west side of the island of Hawaii, and was at the base of the large volcano, Mauna Kea which is about 13796 feet high and the taller of the two volcanoes. The air base was located only a short distance from downtown Hilo and you could walk there in about 15 minutes. The base had a beautiful officers club and the swimming pool was as nice as I have ever seen. I would spend a lot of time there and in the officers club playing pool and drinking wine. We would set a bottle of wine on each corner of the pool table while playing pool. The officer’s mess hall was located near the club and was very nice and had the same kind of waiters as all the other bases. You notice I say mess hall, as this is what the navy called the eating area. There were quite a lot of wooden barracks near by and our squadron got one of these and the other 3 squadrons got one for each of the squadrons. The barracks were 2 stories high and the upstairs was the same as the downstairs and they had a lounge in the center of each floor. The lounge was occupied almost continuous with a card game and a lot of drinking and hollering. The most popular card game was red dog. It was a very simple game and you could lose a lot of money on one hand. There were other games that the dealer decided on. We were allowed 2 fifths of whiskey and 2 bottles of wine each month and if you couldn’t drink your allotment, you would find someone who could, especially Lt.Jg. Wallace Daughtry. He was the pilot who I flew with the entire time at Hilo He was on his 2nd tour.

The NAS Hilo became an international airport after the war and there is nothing left of the base as we knew it. The officers club and the mess hall and barracks are all gone. When we were there, the base had all of the trees and forest with the buildings put into opening of the trees. I think all of this is gone also. The runways are the same as you couldn’t change this because of the small flat area. There was a 9 hole golf course 3 miles up the Volcano Mauna Kea. My 2 friends, Ensign Joe Massey and Ensign John Goodens would get the 2 ton truck and we would use this truck to get to the golf course. You would have to double clutch to change gears and the cabin was covered with cloth or fabric. To get to the golf course, you would go down the main street of Hilo for about a couple of blocks to the end and make a sharp left turn and you would be going uphill. We took turns driving and would leave the transmission in high gear and go as fast as you could uphill until you would have to change gears. We would stop and mark the spot and each time we would try to beat the mark. The driving was really wild.

The golf course had a nice club house and there would be Hawaiian kids trying to be a caddie or selling golf balls. Because the course was up hill, most of the holes were going across the hill and maybe one up hill and more across the hill until you got to the 9th hole. The last hole was like teeing off from a cliff and was about 6oo yards to the green. Because of the height, you could hit the ball about 400 yards downhill. All around the golf course was sugar cane and if you hit a ball into that area, you would lose it. The sugar cane was so sharp, you could cut your hands. The Hilo country club today is an 18 hole course and is advertised as a pretty good golf course. I have a number of pictures of the course and caddies.

Lt.J.G. Daughtry was the pilot who I flew with. I was his wingman. He was a heavy drinker and was drunk most of the time when we were flying. One day, as were flying close to the water just off shore when he made a sharp turn to the left. There was no where for me to go, being that close to the water so I pulled back on the stick and hit top rudder which kept me from going down and managed to pull away from him.

He picked up a girl one night, and went to some motel and because she wouldn’t put out, he set the place on fire and he was burned pretty good on his back. Because of this, he spent a couple of months in the hospital and I flew without a leader during that time, which was o.k. with me. He was always using the extra chits I had for whiskey etc. One of my friends in the Hellcat fighter squadron was taking off when his engine cut out. We were told when this happens because of the low wing loading, to keep the plane going straight ahead. It was not possible to turn the plane
Almost there! This is the final snippet of the conversion to Markdown.

180 degrees and go back to the field without engine power as you would stall out and spin into the ground. This pilot decided to try to turn back to the field. There is always a temptation to do this, trying to survive. Just as soon as he turned, the plane stalled out and spun into the ground. There wasn’t much left of him. I heard they picked part of his head out of the instrument panel. It takes nerve to stay going straight ahead. Even that would not do any good, unless the ground was flat and no buildings etc. As soon as the engine cuts out you must get the nose down in order to keep flying speed and we were trained in that in our early training. The instructor would pull the throttle back and if you didn’t get the nose down really quick, he would rape you knuckles with something.

I was flying on a navigation flight of about 3 hours with our squadron and was returning when the red light on my gas gage came on, which meant I had 50 gallons of gas left and had to switch to that reserve. Because I was flying in the eighth position, you would use more gas than the rest of the planes. You would be constantly moving the throttle back and forth to stay in position. The number 2 plane would hardly have to do this. I called the skipper and told him what was happening and he said “SO”. I didn’t know how far we were from the field and was a bit nervous. we were getting close to the field, flying at 800 feet and was starting to circle it when my engine cut out. There was a runway about 30 degrees to my left, so I dropped my landing gear and flaps as fast as I could and without using ailerons’, I used the rudder to inch my plane around to line up with the runway and was really to close. I was going down very steep, leveled the plane off and hit the runway o.k. Because I was so close, to the runway and after I touched down, I had to pump the brakes back forth and barely stopped in front of the fire truck, which was waiting for me. The skipper had called the base and told them of my troubles. If the engine had quit a few seconds before, I would have gone into the water and if it had been a couple of seconds later, I would have gone into the mountain. They checked the gas tank with a long stick and there was no gas left at all. I was pretty lucky. Looking back, it was the skipper’s fault, staying out too long with no margin of error. But, being young, I did not say anything about it, but should have.

It seemed like drinking was going on all the time. One day at noon, just before we were to have lunch, the whole squadron started to drink and it wasn’t long before everyone of us were smashed. Someone suggested we line up and count off, like they did in the army, We lined up in front of the fish pond and counted off as they did in the army and one of the senior officers marched us to the mess hall laughing and hollering like a bunch of nuts. Before this happened some of the ones who were in bad shape, started to swim in the fish pond and I have a number of pictures of this.

We had survival instruction and lectures and meetings showing us how to survive in difficult situations. On our life jacket there was a packet of green dye. When it was exposed to water, the green dye would spread over a large area and could be seen for miles from the air. This saved many lives. In order to practice with the life boat, we were taken out to sea in a large boat about 30 or 40 feet long. Each of us had a seat pack with the life boat in it and after we were out a few miles, they told us to throw the seat packet into the water. The boat went another 100 feet of so and they told us to jump in the water, swim to the seat pack, open it, inflate the life boat and get in it. We had all of our cloths on except for shoes. The waves were about 5 feet high and quite rough. I dove into the water and swam to the seat pack, opened it and was about to get in it when some guy must have thrown up and it was floating by me. I started to get sick and never did get into by life boat. I have pictures of this also. I don’t know how someone who could not swim would pass this test. Another test was in the swimming pool. They had us get into a parachute harness which was attached to the high diving board and told to jump off the board and we would come to a halt, sometime flipping over before coming to a stop. We would then unhook the leg straps and the chest strap and pull ourselves into a setting position. This was done so when you bailed out and was approaching the water, you raised your arms straight up and fell out of the harness and into the water and you were free of the parachute and would not get tangled up in the shrouds. All you had to do then was get to the seat pack and get into the life boat. This was really good to practice. It would be a bit scary going down in the parachute with out being attached to it.

There was a Hawaiian girl by the name of Millie who use to call us on the telephone and ask if someone would come and see her and bring some whiskey and for this she would do anything. I know some of the guy use to visit her. She had a heavy accent and was difficult to understand, but she got the message through o.k. I think she was part Japanese.

One morning I got a call from my roommate, Ensign Duncan Upshal and he asked me to bring him some clothing down to this flea bitten hotel. He told me someone stole his cloths. He was at a dumpy hotel at the end of the main street in Hilo. When I got there, I went to his room and he was sleeping on a table about 3 by 4 and in the bed was Millie the Hawaiian girl. I guess he woke up and decided he didn’t like what he was sleeping with. I know that my roommate could not hold his drinking which was often. I wonder where he is today.

We were standing around the field, when we were notified that Lt Edward Bruffey was flying above the field and could not get his landing gear down. He would put the plane in a power dive and put the landing gear lever down when he would pull out of the dive really fast, but that didn’t work. He tried everything, but nothing seemed to work. The squadron commander told him he had the options of landing the plane, or bailing out. He decided to land the plane and flew the plane until it was almost out of gas. He brought the plane in so it would land beside the runways on the grass and this would cause less friction and less chance of fire. The best way to land a plane when you could not get the landing gear down was when you forgot and did not know they were still up. His approach was perfect and nose high and going as slow as he could. When he touched the ground and before he came to a stop, he was out of the cockpit and standing on the wing ready to jump off if there was trouble, but there was no trouble and he lucked out. Lt Bruffey was at Barin Field, Pensacola when I was going through the final stage. Our whole group flying in the gunnery stage got a down and I had to go before the Captains board to see if they would not wash us out. Lt Bruffey was on the board and they voted to give us more time, except as I said before, they washed one of us out. We all had to pass 2 check rides in order to continue, and lucky for me that I passed both of them and pretty good marks. I never said anything to Lt. Bruffey, but my navy jacket has the paper work with his name on it. Sorry to say, Lt Bruffey was killed just after the war in a jet crash. I don’t know the details.

Ensign Louis Harmon from Ypsilanti, Michigan had things happen to him. The first one was on take off from Hilo Air Station, his engine cut out and he did what you were supposed to do. He kept going straight ahead and landed in one of the Hawaiians gardens grown by one of the people who lived there. He almost destroyed the garden. He managed to get out safely, but the owner of the garden tried to sue the Navy. I don’t know how that turned out. The second thing that happened to Ensign Harmon was when his flight was coming back to the base. He was having trouble with his engine. Lt. Com. Spencer D. Wright was leading the flight like the one I was on. Harmon kept calling the skipper, telling him his plane was losing power. He kept calling the skipper and telling him this, when the skipper told him to get the hell out of the ship and he did. He was picked up later by a flying boat and was o.k. Harmon lived a charmed life. Harmon was from the zoot suit time in Detroit and he had his uniform Zoot suited. He pegged his pants and lengthened his coat and got a long chain like the Detroit Zoot suitors. Ensign Still took pictures of him and I have those today. Ensign Bjert our artist drew a sketch of him and I have a picture of that.

On the 12th of June, our flight went up for a night navigation flight and as soon as we got into the air, and joined up, we noticed that there was a lot of haze and the visibility was very poor. We canceled the flight and returned to the field and landed o.k., except for one of the pilots named Ensign Jack Theys. His problem was he forgot to put his landing gear down, and what a surprise when the propeller started to chew holes in the runway. When this happened, the plane would have to have an engine change. The props were made in two pieces and welded together so they would not be too heavy. Again, nothing was said to the pilot, but he got the business from us.

The VF squadron who flew the F6F Hellcats sent a flight up for some kind of exercise and there was a midair collision. Both planes went into the water. The navy sent out a search party and all they could find was a parachute lying in the water. The chest strap of the parachute was hooked together and one of the leg straps was unhooked and the other one was not. They thought that the pilot landed in the water o.k. and was unhooking his parachute when something must have gotten to him, and maybe had a meal. No proof of course, but 2 more pilots were gone. The cause of crash was pilot error. That made 3 pilots from the VF fighter squadron that we knew of that have been killed in Hawaii. How many before that in the states were not known.

When we were in the states, we were flying a 7 day schedule, and as soon as we got to Hawaii, they put us on 4 days of flying and 2 days off. We were happy about that. I would have my flying in the morning of 2 or 3 flights and the rest of the afternoon off, or flying in their afternoon and the morning off. We spent most of the free time at the pool, or the golf course. The food at Hilo was outstanding. There were a number of cattle ranges at Hilo and at dinner we could order steak any time we wanted. Sometimes they would have lamb and I would skip that and go to a little shack on the base and get a hamburger and pineapple juice. There was always some kind of fruit on the table. The steaks were as big as the plate. Every day we would go on a flight firing rockets or dropping bombs or gunnery practice. After one flight we would return and park our planes so they could refuel, and reload the armament. We would wait around while they did this and go up for and other flight. Sometimes we would have 2 flights of about 2 hours or sometimes 3 flights. This could be stressful as we flew in close formation all the time and did everything in an orderly manner. There was no time to relax and you had to really pay attention.

I should have mentioned that at Oceana we got the brand new redesigned F4U-4 Corsair. They increased the horse power and added a 4 bladed propeller. They redesigned the canopy to be almost like a bubble similar to some of the army planes. They also added a floor board under the seat and that made it more comfortable on a long flight. You could take your feet off the rudder controls and lay your feet flat on the floor board. When setting in the plane, it felt almost like you were lying down. My first flight in the new corsair was April 25, 1945 at NAS Oceans, Va. We had to fly the new corsair at a slow speed for a number of hours to break in the engine and from then on we flew the F4U-4 corsair most of the time. Today the F4U-4 is considered the finest plane of all. We still flew the older models from time to time and that was O.K., just a different cockpit arrangement. The new plane had a different look from the front because they added a scoop under the engine, which I thought made it look really good. Going to the new corsair from the older one was like going from a Chevrolet to a Cadillac.

Our air group decided to send up a flight of torpedo planes in an unknown area and then have a squadron of our corsairs try to find them and attack like in combat. They would be directed by radar. Again, this was a dangerous operation. When our group located them, they would attack in formation, and make gunnery runs on the torpedo planes. Lt. Shoemaker was leading the flight and one of the other pilots was Lt. JG. Robert Allen. As they were attacking the torpedo planes, Lt.J. G. Allen was too aggressive and crashed his plane into one of the torpedo planes. After the collision, both planes fell into the water and disappeared. I talked to Lt. Shoemaker a few years ago and he said he was screaming for the pilots and crew to bail out, but this did not happen. Lt. J.G. Allen’s wife was pregnant at the time and Shoemaker told me he watched Allen’s son grow up and become a famous sailboat racer and skipper of a famous sailboat. This was 4 more gone from our air group and the cause, ‘PILOT ERROR’.

The only thing I can think have that happened to the Helldiver squadron was when the canopy came off one of the planes, hitting the pilot in the eye as it went by. His entire face turned black, but he was not injured other than that and he made his was back to the base o.k.

On the 5th of July, our entire air group which included the fighter squadron, the torpedo squadron, the dive bomber squadron and our squadron and the fighter bomber squadron flew to Pearl Harbor 200 miles from Hilo to attack and bomb an area near a mountain range on the north side of Pearl Harbor, on the island of Oahu. The total number of planes of this flight was about 100. As we traveled the 200 miles to Oahu, our air group had to “S” turn back and forth under the rest of the planes because they were going a lot slower then we were, so it took quite a while to get there at that slow speed. When we got over the area we were to bomb, we had to take turns diving into the target. It had to be coordinated, or you might have a mid air collisions. We made a number of passes at the target. The mountain ranges were covered with a layer of clouds and we had to pull up very steep in order to miss the mountains and go through the clouds. We dropped the bombs first and fired the rockets on other passes. I can’t believe there was not a mid air collision. Our gas was getting low, so we flew to the NAS Station Barbers Point, which was very close to Ford Island and Pearl Harbor. When we got there, we had to take turns to be cleared to land because of so many planes. One of our planes dropped a havr 5 inch rocket in the middle of the runway. It took quite a while to get some one to pick the rocket up from the runway as it could have been a live round. We stayed at Barbers Point over night and the next morning we flew back to Hilo. My total time for that mission was 5.5 hours.

Back to NAS Oceana in May of 1945 when Jake Apelbaum was trying to make his landings on the USS Charger. He was coming into the grove, but not doing a very good job of it when the LSO gave him the signal to go around, or a wave off, he added throttle to go around when his engine cut out and the plane flipped over on its back and went into the water upside down As the plane was sinking he had trouble releasing the catch of his seat belt. He finally got the right release and came floating to the surface. He was so scared, he couldn’t figure out what to do when the plane was sinking. The destroyer that was behind the carrier picked him up and when he was feeling better, they transferred him to the carrier by the way of a seat that would travel over to the other ship on a cable. In token of the rescue by the destroyer, the carrier sent ice cream over to the ship for rescuing him. I guess that was a custom.

We were all making night carrier landings on the USS Charger at that time, but because Jake’s roommate was killed and Jake took his body to Ensign Berry’s home, he missed qualifying for night carrier landings. Because of this and while at Hilo, the skipper told him he was to go to Pearl Harbor to make his 2 night landings on the USS Saratoga which was there for training pilots. This was July 1945 when he flew to Pearl Harbor and landed on the USS Saratoga. When it turned dark, he took of to make his night landings. He made one landing, when the carrier told him to go to an altitude and orbit as some marine flyers were coming in to qualify. Jake told me this recently, while we were having lunch. While he was up waiting to be cleared to make his last landing, 3 marines were killed trying to qualify. They were never trained as good as navy pilots. After everything was cleared, they let him finish his 2nd landing. He told me he was shaking so bad, he didn’t know how he makes his landings. The next day, he took off and went back to Hilo. I have heard navy pilots talking on TV about their night missions in Vietnam and the only thing they were thinking about was the night landing on the carrier when they got back. Because of the trouble Jake had, the flight surgeon who was Jewish, told him that Jewish people did not make good pilots and offered to have him transferred back to the states to be an instructor, but Jake would have nothing to do with that. He wanted to stay with the squadron.

What happened to me next was as close to being killed as you can get. They asked me to take a plane that had been repaired up to check it out. I went out about 5 miles from the island and flew the plane all over the place to see if every thing was o.k. and it seemed to be. I had done this before. The plane was an older model, an F4U-1D. All of a sudden the seat fell off the back part of the plane and fell to the bottom of the fuselage. The older planes had no floor board and were empty space below the bottom of the seat all the way to the bottom of the fuselage. I was pined in the bottom and could not move. My head was lower than the sill or the bottom of the canopy. I couldn’t see out at all. My feet were higher than my bottom and I had to reach way up to get to the top of the control stick. If you can’t see the horizon, you have to fly by instruments and because I was wedged in, I could not use the rudders. I make sure that my speed was constant and with the help of the artificial horizon instrument, I was able to keep the plane flying level, but could not see to get back to the base. If I stalled out, that would have been the end of me. I knew the direction the field was and headed that way. As I was going back, I let the nose of the plane drop about 30 degrees or more and I could get a fix on the field. I kept doing this and losing altitude until I got back to the field and when I was about 100 feet off the runway and could not drop the nose anymore, I let the plane go down blind and finally it hit the runway and kept going until it ran off the runway and stopped. One of the field hands came out and pulled me out of the cockpit. If I had it to do over, I would have stayed in the plane and had them take a picture of this. I don’t believe this ever happened to another pilot. This would be one of a kind for a write up in the accident reports, which was done all the time to let other pilots to learn from the accidents and mistakes. I didn’t say anything to anyone except my roommate. Someone should have gotten their ass chewed out because of poor repair job. I know they had the seat off for repair and forgot to hook it back on with the bolts. I know I passed my instrument check doing this. I believe this happened in July 1945.

Jack Irwin was coming in for a landing when prop wash from the plane in front of him caused him to lose control and he ran off the runway and plowed through 5 parked airplanes. We called him an ace after that.

One of the pilots, I don’t remember who, was coming in for a landing not having fired his rockets. The air station did not like you coming back with armament. They ordered the pilot to fly out to sea and fire his rockets. He had been making his approach to a landing when they told him to do this. When he was out far enough, he fired his rockets, but he had forgotten to retract his flaps. When you fire rockets the force backward is the same force foreword and so he blew his flats off the plane. I guess he was really surprised. He returned to the base and landed without flaps, which was no big deal. You just had to come in a bit faster.

We flew around the island a lot and it was the most beautiful sight you could see. There were cliffs all around the island and there was no beach at the base of the mountains. There was lava every where. There were a lot of canyons, that would go back in land for a lot of distance and trees grew out of the side of the cliff parallel to the ground. The entire island was thick with trees and underbrush. I was told that planes that went down in those areas were never found. The island did not have snakes because of the mongoose there. There were boars there and some of the guys would go up the mountain hunting for them. They would put their backs next to a tree for protection. My skipper was quite a hunter and he loved to hunt the boars. First you had to get a permit to hunt them. The rest of the pilots would be setting around, or playing volley ball, cards, or just plane drinking.

We were on a high altitude flight, at about 30,000 feet when Lt. J.G. Brown radioed us and said he was losing his oxygen and he instantly turned his plane upside down trying to get to the altitude where there was oxygen. If you held you breath you could get to 15,000 feet pretty fast. If you didn’t find out your oxygen was low, you could be dead in about 30 seconds or less. There is no way you can tell that you are without oxygen except to look at the oxygen gage on the oxygen tank, or look at your finger nails and they should be pink looking. If they are white, you are in trouble. You could also feel the coolness of the oxygen flow inside your oxygen mask. Most of the time, we were flying at 25,000 feet or higher.

Our entire dive bombing flights were from 25,000 feet altitude. Another accident that happened was when my roommate Ensign Opshal was coming in for a landing and the prop wash from the plane in front of him caused his plane to start spinning and his left wing tip hit the runway and he started to cart wheel down the runway. The engine came off and went sliding to the end of the field and after a few flips the plane came to a stop. It wasn’t long before the rescue squad arrived at the crash and they pulled him from the plane and put him on a stretcher. He didn’t like that and got off the stretcher and started to leave and the medical guy’s grabbed him and through him back on the stretcher. In case of shock, they want to take you to the hospital for an examination. He wasn’t even scratched and was flying the next day. I have pictures of his plane with one of the wings twisted and other damage.

In the evening a bunch of us would be setting around someone’s room and we would be asking the pilots who had previous combat to tell us some of the stories and their experiences. Lt. J.G. Donnelly, of New York, was in a dog fight with a Jap Zero and fought him for quit a while and couldn’t turn his plane enough to get his sights on him and in the meantime another Zero fired at him and shot his canopy off and one bullet grazed his forehead. He has the scar to proof it. He was credited with shooting down 3 Japanese planes. I guess that’s why he always had a drink in his hand. He was awarded the DFC and Air Medal. Lt. J.G. Foster Looney was awarded the Navy Cross for helping to sink a Japanese carrier. He was in the famous VB-2 dive bombing squadron. He told me he was just along with the flight and did not know if his bomb hit the carrier or not. Our skipper was awarded the Navy Cross for shooting down 3 Jap flying boats and bombing installations. He was on the USS Wasp that was sunk at the same period. He jumped overboard and with the oil slick and being in the water for a long time before he was picked up, he almost did not make it. While on board the ship that picked him up, he wrote a letter to his wife explaining the sinking of the USS Wasp and reading it could bring tears to your eyes. I think it should be published, it is that good. I have copies of the letter. This was during the battle of Guadalcanal, August 15, 1942. When he was wearing his dress uniforms, he would be wearing the Navy Cross ribbon. I have photographs of him being awarded the Navy Cross.

It was about this time that they gave us our squadron patches and the decals of the patch. The Decals were about 6 inches wide and the patches were about 5 inches wide. Ensign Bjerk was the designer of the patch and I think it is the best design in the U.S. Navy. It is recorded in the archives in Washington. I have a poster of examples of Navy patches and our patch is on this poster. Ensign Bjerk made a few drawings and I wish I had one of them. When the weather was bad and the ceiling was low, they made us go up, one at a time to practice dropping a message on a simulated carrier. We would put our wheels and flats down and fly over the simulated carrier, put the plane in a bank and throw a heavy object out the side of cockpit and come in for a landing and someone else was ready to take his turn. It was a lot of fun. I was standing beside the runway and the skipper was beside me when Ensign Yanoshik was taking off and without leaving the runway, pulled his landing gear up. I can hear the skipper saying “GOD”. With the plane going down the runway before lift off, there was 3 inches of clearance from the tip of the propeller and the runway. I guess Yanoshik was showing off.

The Corsair was the best plane in the service to fly. When you got in the cockpit and started the engine, you could feel the power the engine that the 13-foot prop gave off. When you were flying, you had instant movement or 1 to 1 when you added throttle. I know in jet flying this was not true. In a jet there was a lag in your speed when you added throttle. That’s why when a jet landed on a carrier you had to have full power at touch down and when the plane caught the wires, then you pulled the throttle back. When you landed the corsair and had to go around, you added throttle and it had instant thrust. In the reverse, when you took power off the corsair, you slowed down instantly, making it easy to stay in formation flying. It was difficult to think a 2000 H.P. engine could fly a 7 ton airplane. You could fly the plane as slow as 90 knots which is almost 100 miles per hour and be very stable doing this. The wide landing gear was a plus and in fact the plane was perfect in every way. The experts called the corsair the Ensign eliminator, or the hog nose and the Japanese called it the whistling death. The wing was constructed in one piece and the fuselage was added to the wing. There was no way the wing could be separated form the plane or break apart.

The squadron picked 4 of us to go to Pearl Harbor and fly new planes to Hilo. We flew to Pearl Harbor in a C-47 twin engine plane and landed at Barbers Point NAS Station, and stayed over night. In the morning we were to fly the planes back to Hilo. We had time to spare and went into Honolulu to have some fun. The next morning we went over to Ford Island to look around. There was a new designed corsair parked with a marine standing in front of the plane with a rifle. As soon as we walked up to the plane, the marine said get the fuck out of there. This was one of the new 3000 H.P.Corsairs with 4 banks of 7 cylinders that was just produced. There were only 15 of these built and after the war a few of these were used in the national air races in Cleveland, Ohio. There is one of there planes in the museum at Phoenix, Arizona. After that, we went to the field at Barbers Point and got our 4 brand new F4U-4 corsairs and took off for Hilo. We climbed up to 15,000 feet, just under the oxygen limit and from then on we put the planes in a slight nose down descend and flew to Hilo at about 350 knots all the way. As we were flying, I noticed a hydraulic leak coming from the side of the wing where the landing gear was retracted. This was a typical spot for a hydraulic leak on new planes. This would be the 3rd time this happened to me. I knew by the time we got to Hilo I would not have any hydraulic pressure. There was 2 ways to get the landing gear down. The first was a hand crank inside of the cockpit and I knew that it would take a longtime and many cranks to get the landing gear down. I was not ready for this. The other way was a CO-2 bottle and when you put the landing gear lever in the down position and turned the handle of the C.O. 2 container, the landing gear would come down in a hurry and this was good only once. Just as we were cleared for landing, I used this method. No way was I going to use the crank method.

The Navy told us we were going to evade Japan, and our training changed. No longer would we be doing dive bombing as such, and no longer would we practice rockets as we had been doing. Instead of bombing and rockets from a steep angle, we would be doing skip bombing and rockets from a slight angle and at low altitude. The Navy put up large banners stretched across a beach and close to the water. The banner was about 50 feet high and about 100 feet across and it was quite large. We would break off form our flight, one at a time from about 5000 feet and dive straight down and level off at just above the water and head for the banner at the same level. When we got with in a couple of hundred feet from the banner, we would release the bomb and pull straight up with a slight turn and then we could see where the bomb hit. It was very easy to hit the target. We would do this over and over and this was more fun than any of the other types of bombing because you could tell the speed of your plane easier. And because of this change, the Navy changed the VF fighter squadron form flying hellcats to flying corsairs. The VF squadron always thought the hellcat was better than the corsair, but they changed their minds not long after the switch. We saw those chasing tails at night and other stupid things. If you look into the records you will see that the VF Squadron flew both the hellcats and corsairs.

On the 25th of July, we had two flights of field carrier landing practice at night. I don’t know why as we were not going to make any landing on a carrier at night.

We were notified that our entire air group would be flying to Pearl Harbor and go aboard the USS Antietam for practice as an air group simulating going into combat. The USS Antietam had just been commissioned and was ready to go into combat. We were going to have flights as if we were going into combat. When we started to land on the carrier, we had to take turns and to land 100 planes would take quite a while. It took a long time from Hilo to the carrier 200 miles distance. The flight I was flying in was at the very top of all of the planes and the furthest back. My leader started a cross over and went to close to the planes in front of us and I caught prop wash and it flipped me out of position and I started to lose altitude and every time I lost a few feet, I would hit the lower planes prop wash again and this continued until I was lower than any of the planes. I turned to get away from the planes and gradually got back to my flight and rejoined up. No one noticed what happened and nothing was said. Prop wash could cause a lot of trouble.

When we got close to the carrier, they would clear each flight to come in for their landings. To land 100 planes would take some time and I can’t think of very many wave offs, so we did pretty good. We would spend 7 days on the carrier and each squadron would go on flights of there own. They assigned us quarters and the higher ranks got the best rooms. I was assigned a bunk in the forward part of the ship called the facile bunk room. Again, that is where the lights never went out and there was always a card game going on. You could never get any sleep at any time. The first thing you heard early in the morning was the planes being catapulted and that make a heck of a noise. The carrier would operate all day long. The carrier would do this to practice the things they had to do under flight operations, almost more than the air group needed practice.

We would fly sometimes 2 flights everyday and in the 7 days I made 6 carrier landings. One of the flights I went on was a fighter directory assignment where the ACI department would direct you by radar to the spot they wanted you to go. In this case, they sent a flight of planes out in an undisclosed area, and they sent another flight to intercept them as if you were protecting the carrier. This could be dangerous when one flight started to attack the other group. We make so many turns, it would be really easy to get lost and not know where the carrier was. If the planes turned one way and I another, I would still be out there. They gave us a card with letters arranged in a circle with the center supposed to be the carrier. The carrier would send out signals in Morse code and we would pick the letters up on the radio this way you could find the carrier. This came out late war. Each day you would get a different card with the letters changed. This would be so the Japanese could no find out the system. Some of the early pilots would have loved to have this method as a lot of pilot lost their way and could not find their carrier. I heard that entire flights were lost.

I can’t believe we did not have some kind of accident in the seven days, but we were lucky. The one thing that happened was Ensign James Stills plane caught on fire. I was in the island of the carrier and watched him come in for the landing with smoke trailing back of his plane, but he made it o.k. There was always some sailor taking picture form the island with a large camera and he could take a picture every time he pulled the trigger. They gave Ensign Still a picture of his plane coming in on fire. We returned to Hilo on the 6th of July safely. We continued to fly our 2 or 3 flights a day and on the 15th of August we were told that the Japanese were accepting surrender and the place went wild. Some of the guys were pissed off as they wanted to get to combat and make a name for themselves. Most of the guys were happy as hell that the war was over and wanted to get home. My skipper was upset because he wanted to shoot down a couple more planes and become an ace.

That night we had a party to end all parties. The older guys rounded up a lot of 5th of whiskey and other drinks. They got a waste basket and filled it with bottles of booze and put a pillow in front of the basket. They would fill an old fashion glass full and each pilot would put there knees down on the pillow, make a toast and drink the glass full of whiskey in on gulp. If you wouldn’t do this, they would grab you, force you on the pillow and make you drink it. After a while, they wouldn’t have to force any one. Soon everyone was wasted, including me. Lt. J.G. Daughtry took me to his room, filled a tall glass of whiskey full and I drank it straight down

. A very dumb thing to do, but I was not in a condition to know any better. The last I knew, I was walking down the hall and I passed out standing up and didn’t wake up till the morning. I had thrown up all over the bed and I guess that was a good thing. I remember hitting each side of the walls and was completely blind. My friends told me they took all my clothes off and through me in a cold shower. One of the things I remembered was Lt. Maurice Rogers ‘BUCK ROGERS’, was on the floor and trying to get up on the bed and he was one of the drinkers of the squadron. The next day I lay by the pool and it was sometime before I could navigate. I was not the only one trying to recover.

I flew 12 more flights before the Japanese signed the surrender on the 15th of September, but we still kept on flying. While we were waiting around, the squadron decided to see if they could break the endurance record of a single engine airplane that the marines had set. The squadron picked Lt.J.G Raburn Schneidburg to set the record. They put 3 belly tanks on the plane. The main tank would hold 240 gallons of gas. He took off at 3 in the morning with a full supply of beer. He would fly around the island of Hawaii, staying as close to the shore as possible. Every time we saw the plane go by, you could almost count the revolutions of the prop. I believe he was flying at 1300 hundred R.P.M. and he had the gas mixture turned back as far as was safe. He came down at 5 o’clock in the after noon and they had to help him out of the cockpit and as far as I know, he set the record for that type of plane. 15 hours was a long time to stay up. It would be interesting to find out if this is recorded any where, but I witnessed the event. Finally they told 8 of the oldest and married pilots that they could go home. We had a small party for them and took pictures of the 8. They were loaded on a C-47 for the trip to Pearl Harbor and that started the end of our squadron after training together for 10 months, which is longer, I think, than any other squadron stayed together.

While at Hilo, I flew 13.4 hours in June, 49.2 hours in July, 20.4 hours in August, 16.8 hours in September, and 4.3 hours in October. On Oct 3rd after coming down from a flight and still at the airplane when a friend came out and told me that I was going to be the next one to go home along with Ensign Klein, and Ensign Wise. On Oct 8th, we boarded a C46 for the flight to Pearl Harbor. Looking back, I can’t believe I would not be flying the corsair again. How could I give that up? What happened next would always make me wonder if I could have refused. The reason I accepted was I thought this was also going to happen to the rest of the pilots in the squadron.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter17.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter19.md)
