# Chapter Twenty: After the War

The Becker Street gang after the war

Gerald Nichols was killed shooting a Jap down while flying off the USS Yorktown, He was awarded the Air Medal and I think for what he did he should have gotten the Navy Cross. January 1945. Ray Yelland flew B-24s and was shot down in the Kurial Islands and managed to survive after spending a week trapped in snow 5 or 6 feet high. He was sent home through the underground and through Russia and was discharged because, if he were taken as a captive, he would be tried as a spy. He was awarded the DFC and the Air Medal. Bill Hart flew C 46s over the hump in China and he survived o.k. Dick Asp was in the navy and got home safe. Robert Taylor did not go into the service. Campbell Spence was in the navy and shortly after he got home, he died of cancer. Skip Mills was a navigator and I don’t think he saw combat. Bob Thompson was sent to San Diego to join an Air Group, but before he had a chance to go into combat, he was killed night flying. He crashed into a mountain, south of San Diego. None of the Skaffs went into the service.

This is the end of story except for making correction Robert Ewen McGaffin Ensign U.S. Navy. This is the first draft and there will be changes and additions later on.

### A Footnote

The United States navy donated an F4U-1D to the National Air and Space Museum in September 1960. Vought delivered this Corsair, Bureau of Aeronautics serial number 50375, to the Navy on April 26, 1944. By October, pilots of VF-10 were flying it but in November, the airplane was transferred to VF-89 at Naval Air Station Atlantic City. It remained there as the squadron moved to Naval Air Station Oceana and NAS Norfolk. During February 1945, the Navy with drew the airplane from active service and transferred it to a pool of surplus aircraft stored at Quantico, Virginia. In 1980, NASM craftsmen restored the F4U-1D in the colors and markings of a Corsair named “Sun Setter,” a fighter assigned to Marine Fighter Squadron VMF-114 when that unit served aboard the USS Essex in July 1944. The plane is now on display at the National Air and Space Museum at Dulles Air Field, Washington This plane was flown by all the pilots in my Air Group 95 while we were stationed at NAS Oceana, Virginia in June of 1944. The number 50375 is listed in my log book. The pictures of this plane called the sun setter shows the plane with number 56 on the fuselage.

In order to become a navy pilot before the war, you must have had a college degree. In 1941 they changed the requirements to 2 years of college. Before 1942 all future pilots took their training at the N.A.S. Pensacola and they stayed there until they were designated a naval aviator. The training took about 12 months and consisted of 5 stages, beginning with bi-planes. The nest stage was flying on the water with float planes. Then the pilots went on to heavier planes and instrument training. After that, they flew heavy flying boats and finally on to airplanes they would fly in combat. This was all done at the N.A.S. Pensacola. There were two other places where cadets trained and graduated as pilot and these were at Miami and Jacksonville, but not too many trained there. Most of the cadets trained at Pensacola. By the end of 1942 there were about 6000 designed naval aviators. From 1942 till the end of the war the system changed by sending the cadets to different fields located all over the United States for each stage and finally to Pensacola or Corpus Christi, Texas, and from there to fields located I n Florida for advanged training in combat airplanes. I tried to tell the story of the training from 1942 to 1945 in order to become Navy Pilots. This type of training only lasted during the war years. In 1942 the requirements were changed to high school graduate and 18 years of age. When these cadets graduated, most of them were only 19 or 20 years of age and were the youngest in the history of Naval Aviation. I just turned 20 when I was designated a Naval Aviator. In the years to come the history of the training for navy pilots in ww11 will be lost. The history at one base will be known, but not the total sequence.

### A Note about Lt J.G Sid Cichy

When Cid returned home, he became a coach at a high school in Fargo, North Dakota. In the next 35 years as a coach he won at least 30 national titles and was enshrined in many coached hall of fame, including the national hall of fame. He passed away in January 2006. Sid was also the teacher of Roger Maris and taught him to play football and baseball.

. A very dumb thing to do, but I was not in a condition to know any better. The last I knew, I was walking down the hall and I passed out standing up and didn’t wake up till the morning. I had thrown up all over the bed and I guess that was a good thing. I remember hitting each side of the walls and was completely blind. My friends told me they took all my clothes off and through me in a cold shower. One of the things I remembered was Lt. Maurice Rogers ‘BUCK ROGERS’, was on the floor and trying to get up on the bed and he was one of the drinkers of the squadron. The next day I lay by the pool and it was sometime before I could navigate. I was not the only one trying to recover.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter19.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md)
