# Chapter Four: The University of Iowa Preflight School, Iowa City, Iowa

When we arrived at the University of Iowa, they put us in a squad of about 50 cadets, and we stayed in the Quadrangle, which was a four-sided building with a courtyard in the center and exits on four sides. It was quite unique. The courses were athletics and academic, but mostly athletics.

All through our training, we had a few special courses that we took until the end of the war. These were navigation, recognition, Morse code, and meteorology. In sports, we had swimming at every base. There was a series of tests for swimming that you tried to pass, and most of the cadets could not pass very many of those. I have a card that shows I passed through triple “AAA” and the survival course. It was difficult for the cadets to pass further than the “C” test.

Besides our academics, we had to go through all of the sports for at least 2 weeks each. These were football, boxing, swimming, and we played pushball, which was with a 6-foot rubber ball. For pushball there were 6 cadets on each team and 6 cadets on the sideline ready to go in when their team got too tired which was about 5 minutes and was as strenuous as soccer. When the game started, 5 players would go around the ball to meet 5 of the other team, leaving one to hold the ball. The only rule was when you get the guy down, you could not bite him. They had a crutch squad of all the injured and most of them came from push ball.

Another test we had to perform was to find out what kind of shape we were in. There were Doctors who would test us after we would step up and down on a platform at a certain count. This was done for a length of time and afterwards the Doctors would examine us by taking our pulse and blood pressure and seeing how long it took to get back to normal. When I got to Iowa preflight I was tested at 88% and because of the training at Mt. Pleasant, they were only able to keep me at the same percentage, 88%.

We had to pass a swimming test that consisted of jumping off a platform 40 feet high into the pool with our cloths on. Then we had to take our shirt off, tie knots in the sleeve, and show you could use your shirt as a floating device. Next, we had to take our pants off, tie knots in each leg, and also show you could float with the pants. As soon as we put our cloths on the side of the pool, we then had to swim for one hour using each one of the strokes, Side, Brest, back, and the Australian crawl. I passed this test without hardly breathing hard. There were more tests to take in the future. The ones who could not swim, stayed in swimming all the time they were there. No other sports. That’s why the Navy thought swimming was so important. The non-swimmers would paddle around with floating cans on there back, and when they tried to go to the edge of the pool to rest, the instructors would push them away with a long pole with a padded ball on the end. The pool was always full. A good percentage of the cadets could not swim. The reason for that was most everyone lived in the inner city and did not have a chance to learn. Cards for survival showing the number of tests you took was given to us.

My 2 weeks in football was the most fun. I had never played football in high school because I thought I was too light, 145 pounds. Only with my friends on a corner lot somewhere. They supplied us with full equipment and assigned us to a squad and we stayed with them for the 2 weeks. The system they used then was called the “T” formation. This way the Navy was trying to make men out of us, they assigned us positions that we were least expected to play. So I became a fullback. The fullback’s job was the same as a blocking back and you had to lead the running back through the line, just right for a 145-pounder.

When I was about 8 years old, I was playing ball in the street, and while running to first base, the telephone pole, I tripped and hit my face on the sidewalk, breaking one of my front teeth in half and split my lip pretty good. So on one of my blocking assignments, I hit this cadet on his knee and that broke the other front tooth, making them even, so now you couldn’t tell if they were broken.

It so happened that I was supposed to run the obstacle course just after the football workout. I didn’t have time after the football to change my gear, so I had to run the course with full football clothing. The optical course was like most of them, a high wall to climb, and a rope crossing a short length of water. The rope was going downhill so gravity would pull you down.

One of the toughest courses was signaling, which was semaphore and blinker. You had to pass semaphore with 12 words a minute, and blinker 10 words a minute. The semaphore was easier then blinker. They would not send you messages that you could understand, but letters all mixed up. They knew that it was easier when you could understand the message. 12 words a minute was fairly fast, but the blinker was very difficult. At 10 words a minute, it looked like it was a steady light. If you were doing badly in either one, they would restrict you to the base for the weekend. One sailor instructor could take 25 words a minute. When he finished the message, he still had about 5 letters to write down. Later on in instrument flying, there were only 2 letters that we had to know for sure. They were an “A” and “N”, and even today I know what they are in Morse code.

Another sport was boxing. All of our instructors were specialists in their instruction, and probably came from coaching in college. For 2 weeks they taught us the fine art of boxing. We all wore head gear. Some of the cadets were very good and had experience in civilian life. One of my friends by the name of Rhodes, who was with us at Mt Pleasant was a light heavy weight boxer and could beat anyone. After 2 weeks they gave us a final test. They paired us with some one who was about the same weight. The instructor told me and my opponent to forget everything he taught us, no holds bared and the one who drew the most blood would be the winner. They just wanted to see a good fight. In my fight, the cadet knocked me done once, and I knocked him down once. Only one round, and when we were through, the instructor told us we had a damn good fight.

Every Sunday would be parade day. Parents and relatives would come from all over the United States for our march to the parade ground which was every Sunday. We would muster in our dress uniforms and march to the parade ground in order of our length of stay at the school. On the parade ground, we would line up with the group that was about to leave being first in line and the newest would be in the back. There were 10 regiments, and being last sure made you feel like you were never going to leave. When we marched to the parade ground, on Sunday, a full navy band would lead the way. It was very stirring. In the evening, the band would play music in the center of the quadrangle, and there was never a lack of talent. There were professionals all over the place.

Gerald Nichols was at the preflight the same time as I was. One day we borrowed a camera and took pictures of each of us. We put on the white dress jacket for the picture. Gerald was ahead of me about a month. I was sure sorry when he left and I was still there. He went to N.A.S. Glenview, Ill. for primary training and that is the reason he ended up at the west coast and was sent to combat.

The preflight school at Iowa had one of the best football teams in the nation. Most of the cadets were college graduates, and the school had a number of all-Americans. They also had the best college coaches in the nation. The football team was called the Seahawks and played all of the major colleges, Ohio State, Michigan, Alabama. My roommate, Bob Sloan who was at Mt. Pleasant was on the team for a while until he was injured. My other roommate was John McNulty who WAS a 4.0 student. He applied for lighter-than-air training at N.A.S. Lakehurst. Only the top of the class would have a chance to get into that school. I never saw him again or heard about him after that.

We did a lot of marching and had to take turns leading the group and calling out cadence. When we came to a hill, we had to carry one of the cadets on our back up the hill. We stayed with the same guys in our group for all 3 months. Our leader was a great guy. All of them were Lt. and were 90-day wonders.

The city of Iowa was only a couple of blocks away and we used to go there on our small time off. The city was small but very nice. Most of our athletics were done in the field house which was Hugh. It had a dirt floor and it was so big that you could play football in it. They would set up almost any kind of sport there. You could kick a football and not have to worry about hitting the ceiling. We would also attend Sunday church service there, and it would hold all of the 1000 cadets with no trouble.

The head of the preflight school was Captain Harahan, who was in WW1. The preflight school at the University of Iowa was just one of many preflight schools. There was a school at St Mary’s college California, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, Athens, Ga. Del Monte, California.

When I got my order to the next place, I was at the time very disappointed. We knew that we were going to a primary base, sometimes called the elimination base to learn to fly the N2S-3 Stearman bi-plane. I was hoping it would be a long way from Iowa City to enjoy a long trip on the train, but my orders were to go to the N.A.S. Ottumwa, Iowa was just a short distance by bus. As it turned out it was one on the best stations in the Navy.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter03.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter05.md)
