# Chapter Nine: Advanced Training N.A.S. Barin Field Pensacola

From Whiting field we will be going to the N.A.S. Barin field located in Foley, Alabama, just across the border of Florida. This is the station where we will graduate as a fighter pilot. Barin field was called Bloody Barin. This came about through the newspaper icon Drew Pearson who said he would rather send his son to any where in war area than to a certain field at Pensacola. The casualty rate at this field was pretty high. The Navy invited him to come down to the field and see, but he refused. I remember there were caskets piled up quite high beside one of the hangers. There was a story about why so many pilots got killed and this was when the cadets were coming back from the main station, Pensacola from the weeks leave all drunked up and were killed in auto accidents. Barin field was about 30 minutes from downtown Pensacola. I don’t thing this was true, but a good story.

We got to the air station the same old way, the cattle cars and we were assigned three to a room and also put in a flight of 6 and would be with them for the entire training. I can only remember 3 of them. The base had 2 fields and there was a proper way to leave the field and return and if you didn’t do this right, you would be in trouble. On the ground there were pylons that you had to follow that made you follow in one line, not like in primary where you came in to the field with many planes side by side. This was a good way to keep the accident rate down. Later on I got into trouble with this traffic pattern. This base was the second largest auxiliary base of the six out lying fields at Pensacola.

The planes we were to fly were the same as at Whiting field, and there we always flew duel. We just got in the plane and took off and that was the way it was from then on. The base was located not far from the ocean. A lot of our flying was over water, such as gunnery and navigation. I flew a total of 80 hours at Barin field and went up with an instructor only 2 times. We always flew in a flight of 6 and if we needed to be tested, an instructor flew with us in his own plane. All the marks he gave us were from watching us from a distance and I don’t know how they did that.

The first training we did was flying around in formation with an instructor following us in his plane. We were marked for every flight and a 3.0 was a good mark which converts to a 75%. For some reason the instructors did not think we were good enough for anything better and 2.5 was passing. If you got less than 2.5 three times you would have to go before Navy board and they would decide if you could go on. This happened to all 6 of us at the same time while we were in gunnery and you know that they decided to get rid of some of us. Again we had to fly two passing flights to continue, which we did. Of the 6 of us, they washed out one of us. I remember what he looked like and he was in shock and couldn’t believe it. He broke down pretty good as it was only 2 weeks from graduation. I know that they picked him like drawing from a hat.

Ten Williams who was at Pensacola the same time as I was and they make him an instructor. The Navy told him to start washing out more cadets as the Navy knew the war was coming to a close and pilots were not needed as much. He told the navy that if the cadet was a good pilot, he would not wash him out. But I am getting ahead of myself.

We still went to classes for navigation, meteorology, recognition, and instruction in gunnery to learn the different methods for shooting at the sleeve. We took turns towing the sleeve, which was still the most dangers flying you could do. There were certain methods you had to follow for navigation. One of the flights we took was over the water we were to fly 3 100 mile segments over the water like a triangle and finishing at the field. We had a plotting board in the instrument panel that we could plot the course we were to take. They gave us a sealed envelope with the instructions for the direction of the 3 segments. That could be in any direction. We had to plot this on the navigation board and this was done while we were flying in a 3 plane formation. Try that sometime. What we did was pull apart a short distance while we did the plotting.

I lucked out pretty good. When I took off to join up with the other planes, I was unable to retract my landing gear, so I had to go back to the base. The other 2 cadets had to finish the course. Lucky for me as the 2 cadet got lost and ended up at a field in Mississippi. They didn’t get in any trouble for that and I never did take my test.

I flew 46 flights at Barin Field and at no time did I fly the same plane twice. There were that many planes at the field and I would guess at least 200 airplanes. This type of plane, the SNJ Texan was used in almost all of the training, both in the air corps and Navy.

One of the many things that happened to me was entering the traffic pattern. I thought I was pretty good so in following the pylons I would go around them pretty steep, somewhat like a hot dog style. When I got back to the base I had a note to report to this instructor. He told me I cut him off going around a pylon. I had no recognition that this happened. The instructor had me clean airplanes for a week No argument. Still that is the only trouble I got into for that.

The test we had for acrobatics with out any instruction form the instructors was to fly above the field at 3000 feet and perform the required acrobatics. We were flying solo and the instructors were setting in chairs on the ground watching us. I don’t know how they could tell who was what, as there were a number of planes doing the acrobatics the same time. I don’t think they knew what I was doing. That was O.K. by me. I said before, there was not enough instruction in groups for what you were required to do. This procedure was done many years before my training.

There was not a whole lot to do at the base, except hang out at the lounge for drinks etc. You could stay in your room and listen to the radio. One of the cadets in my room was training to be a singer and most of the time he would be practicing his voice lessons. My other roommate and I got pretty tired of that. Again they were mostly older than me. There were also dances on the week end and they would invite all the girls form the whole area.

I would go into downtown Pensacola on the short weekend they would give up, by bus. If you were standing on the street down town Pensacola, there would be so many cadets, you could hardly walk around. I would see some or the cadet I trained with in other stations and everybody would ask when you are going to get your wings. Of all the ones I knew, not any of them were taking the fighter course. Most of them were in multi-engine or flying boats and most of them were further along than me. I was in the training that I wanted to be in. To make landings on a carrier was the only way to go. This was naval aviation.

The gunnery phase was the most difficult. I think I got the most hours in this phase. One of us would tow a sleeve of nylon on the back of cable about 200 feet long. It was difficult to take off with the sleeve. We held the brakes of the plane, reviled the engine to full power, released the brakes, pulled the plane off as quickly as we could and go straight up to about 500 feet and dump the nose and hope you would not stall out. Enlisted sailors held the sleeve in the air and if we did it right, the sleeve would not touch the runway. The other 5 cadets would follow the tow plane to the area over the golf for the target area. One of us would take turns leading the flight and radio the other cadet which type of run we would do. There were 3 types, the over head, the high side, and one where you would come underneath the sleeve called the low side. All of our approaches were from about 1000 about the tow plane and at least half mile in front of the tow plane. We would be in a right echelon and peel off one at a time for our run with a proper interval. An example with the overhead, we would turn so we were flying right over the opposite direction of the tow plane and at the proper moment we go inverted and dive at the sleeve so that we would be able to sight ahead of the sleeve and correct for the speed of the tow plane. If you inverted too late you would not be in position to shoot the sleeve. And if you inverted too soon, you could hit the sleeve. To hit the sleeve was quite difficult and In order to pass you had to get a score of at least 5%. We also would have to pass the sleeve at a 70 degree angle or steeper. This was done so if you were shooting at a plane, they would have a tough time firing at you. The quicker you got out of there was better. The interval of each plane had to be far enough apart so that you would not be shooting the pilot ahead of you. We would join up in an echelon after every run and start the next. While we were doing this an instructor would be floating around watching us and that is how he would mark you.

I forgot to mention when taking the sleeve off, if we didn’t get it off soon enough, it would drag on the runway and tear it apart. If that happened we would drop it in the drop area, land and do it all over again. This did not make everyone happy.

One day when I went to the plane assigned to me I noticed a hole in each side of the propeller. The gun, a 30 caliber was positioned on top of the coiling and would shoot the bullets through the propeller area. There was a synchronization that allowed the bullets to miss the propeller. If something went wrong and you shot the prop, the mechanic would drill a hole in the other blade to balance the prop. The bullets were painted with different colors so you would know how many hits each pilot got. There are 8 colors and there was always a fight over blue and purple. A copy of the each write up by the instructor is in my flight jacket. The flight jacket is a file with a copy of all my orders and marks from every station from primary to the end. Later on I will tell some of the marks and why I got them.

One day as I started to taxi to the flight line and I hit another plane with my wing. The damage to the planes was just a little bit too each wing tip, nothing to get excited over. This was written up in my flight jacket.

On one of the gunnery flights which I was leading, I had a very close call. We were going out to the Area and our flight of 5 were weaving back and forth so we would not go faster than the tow plane, when what happened is slightly dim in my memory. I was turning the flight in one direction and the tow plane turned into our area at the same altitude. As we were turning, one of our planes hit the cable with his antenna wire which was a wire stretched from the banner to the back of the cockpit and only about a foot about the fuselage. The plane that hit the wire turned over and went plunging toward the ground. You can’t believe what went through my mind. Whose fault it was I do not know. I watched him going down and finally he came out of the dive and joined up with us again and that ended the flight for that day. A foot closer and the cable could have ripped the plane in two pieces, not to mention what it would have done to the tow plane. It was a matter of inches between life and death. Nothing was said of this accident and I lucked out there. I remember the cadet who hit the wire to this day. Later on he had another accident.

It was during this gunnery phase that the instructors gave all of a down or a failing mark. For one of us to get a failing mark makes sense, but all of us at the same time was not correct. The instructor said we were not going by the sleeve at less then 70 degrees and again he was wrong. I went by so steep, almost vertical for this gunnery run and we all had to go before the captains board who decided if we could go on or flunk out. They gave 5 of us extra time, except one we had to take two flight checks and we all passed them except the cadet that was washed out. At the Captains board, if you look in my flight jacket, which I have the original of; you can see the failing marks which are all written in red. With some of the things that happened to me, I was lucky to get though. Again I knew guys that didn’t have one bit of trouble.

After graduation and further on I had quite a few more problems and most of my officers in my squadron also. One of the officers on the captain’s board was a Lt. Bruffey who was in my squadron. After the war, Lt. Bruffey was killed in a jet accident.

My twin brother visited me at Barin field and I got my instructor on one of the gunnery hops to take him up to watch us. When the instructor went by us I could see my brother waving at me like he was having a ball. Maybe this helped me to get through the training, who knows? I was sure happy when this stage was over with.

I had 7 flights at night and all we did was flying around in a flight of 3. Just flying around with no destination is more difficult than flying from one point to and other. You could plot the course and the time to get there and back. I still don’t know how we got back to the field, but we did. They gave us no instruction in what could happen, flying at night. It was very easy to get what they called vertigo. This is when you would lose your ability to tell if you were going down or up. I do know that if you stared at the lights to much, this could happen. The way you could stop that is to look at the lights on the wings for only a short time and look away and then back again. Doing this for an hour is hard to do. There was a green light on the end of the left wing, and red light on the right wing. One night at about 3 in the morning, they got all of up and mustered in front of the barracks and took a roll count. The reason for that was there were 2 flyers missing and they were trying to fine them. The navy said they must have gotten vertigo night flying and flew right into the ground in formation. Night fighters are one of the groups you could apply for, but this was not for me. I had some trouble later on night flying, but will talk about that later.

There were 2 stages left before we would graduate. They were dive bombing and fighter combat against an instructor. For the dive bombing stage we were to drop 25 bombs at a target in the water, which were 4 pylons in a square and one pylon in the middle located in the water. The total distance of the target across the target could be about 50 feet. We would do this from a 3 plane formation and drop one bomb at a time, so it took quite a while to drop 25 bombs. I was really lucky to get 12 bull eyes out of the 25 which was a lot more than I needed. One of the guys, the same one who hit the tow plane, didn’t pull out soon enough and crashed in the water. All he got was a bloody face out of that. They didn’t do anything about that to him. You could crack up a plane and they would not flunk you out while if you did some minor thing they would really penalize you. I checked my marks in my flight jacket and the instructor gave me a 3.0. There was no such thing as getting a 4.0, 3.1 were about the highest mark that the instructors gave. I got a 2.7 from a check ride in primary and my main instructor told me I did excellent and that was the highest mark this instructor ever gave out.

For the combat stage, we would meet the instructor in a certain area and we would dog fight and see who the best was. The way it started was the cadet would fly 1000 feet above the instructor and we would be heading straight at each other. The cadet got the advantage by being higher. As soon as I was over the top of the instructor, the fight would begin. As soon as this happened the cadet would turn like you were going to get on the tail of the other plane and losing altitude at the same time. The instructor would turn in the opposite direction and you would be going head on again. As soon as you passed the other plane, one would again turn to get on your tail and this would go on for quite a while until someone make a mistake. Whoever got on the tail of the other one, the fight was over as the rear plane could do anything the other plane could do very easy.

One of my friends gave me some information on how to beat the instructor. He told me as you were heading toward each other at the same altitude, put you flaps down and slow the plane down just above stalling. Just before you are at the same spot and about to pass, you would do a half snap roll just before you got to him, which would put you going the same direction as the instructor before you reached him. but maybe a 100 or 200 feet below him, but going in the same direction, and as we continued I inched my way up to the same altitude as he was and directly behind him and I won the combat. HE wiggled his wings to let me know I had won. Again I checked my flight jacket and all he gave me was a 3.1. That is the highest mark I ever got. That did not seem fair. Because I did so well in the last 2 stages is the reason I finally got through O.K.

Barin field had a firing rifle and machine gun firing range and they wanted us to find out what it was like to fire a 50 caliber machine gun. The machine gun was mounted on a tri-pod and we had to wrap our arms around the gun and hold on for dear life. The fire power was unbelievable.

My last flight was June 19th and my final mark was 2.88 which I was happy with, just as long as I passed. I had my Skipper’s jacket and his final mark was 3.0 or 1.2 better than me. 3.0 were difficult to get.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter08.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter10.md)
