# Chapter Three: War Training Service Training for the Piper Cub Airplane

We got our orders to Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, to learn how to fly, and that was what we were waiting for. There were about 20 of us going there, and all of us had names starting with M, so you know how they picked us. Where the rest went, who knows?

My memory is short on some of this, but I do know we boarded a bus which had wicker seats. The ride to Mt. Pleasant was slow, as the roads were only two lanes, and not many of them. I tried to remember the route, and I think we traveled on highway 250, which went to Toledo, Ohio, and on up to Saginaw, Flint, and north on the old highway U.S. 23 to Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, and to Mt. Pleasant Teachers College to start our training to fly. The bus we traveled on was pretty old.

We stopped a number of times, and the stores at that time had one-armed bandits, which we played a lot. When we arrived at Mt. Pleasant, they assigned us rooms in the student union. It was a beautiful building with a large lounge of beautiful paneling. The wide stairway was in the middle of the lounge, at least 15 feet wide. Upstairs was a large room used for dancing and other events? Our rooms were on the first floor with tall windows, easy to get out of in case you wanted to go somewhere after bed check.

At Mt. Pleasant, we had both academics and flying. The airport was about three miles from the school along the old US 23 to highway 20. The way we got to the airport was by a big cattle car, large enough to carry at least 50 cadets with benches along the side. The academics consisted of Navigation, Meteorology, and other related courses. All of this was in the regular classrooms that the other college students used. As usual, we marched to class in a squad.

We were the first ones to start training at Mt. Pleasant for the Navy, and before we left, there were two other groups there. The Navy told the college to give us a tough course in physical training, and the head coach said yes sir, and what he put us through was really tough. We ran the mile or two-mile course for time and other things. All in my group would run at the same time, but there were only two of us who would really try, Bob Sloan and me. Bob was really a good athletic, especially in basketball and football. He was from Indiana, and I guess that’s why he was so good in Basketball. Whether we ran the mile or two-mile race, he always came in first. Just before every one-mile race, the coach would tell me to give it all I got, hoping I would beat Bob Sloan, but that never happened.

The campus was very small. It was a few buildings within a ½ mile square with some dorms on the outskirts. The swimming pool was very small, and when you dove off the diving board, you could touch the ceiling. As the years went by, the college grew to be much larger and was excellent in sports in division II.

My first flight in the Piper Cub was not very good. The instructor showed me some of the basic things to do. Every time he would make a turn, I would try to keep my body straight up and down. The instructor said relax and go with the turn. He put a notation in my log book that said “FIRST TIME UP, SLIGHTLY TENSE.” That was an understatement. I never had that instructor again.

My final instructor was named Michael Calley, who was about 20 years old and had 2000 hours flying time. The first time I went up with him, I found out he was a daredevil and a very good pilot. The second time we flew, I scared the hell out of him with my takeoff. In the log book, they marked you 1 to 5, 5 being the worst, for each item such as landings, takeoffs, gliding, holding your airspeed, and many others. He marked me a 5 for takeoffs and he said he might have to go back and change his shorts. After the 3rd or 4th flight, I got the hang of it, and my marks started to get better.

After coming in for a landing, my instructor got out of the plane and said, “Take the plane up by yourself.” Soloing is one of the important flights as there is only one of those. I was shocked that he wanted me to go alone, but as soon as I got off the ground, I found out it was much easier, especially not having someone watching over you. When I landed, he marked me 2 for both landings and takeoffs. My hours at that time were 7 hours and 40 minutes, which was fairly fast.

I was at Mt Pleasant 3 months, and it is difficult to remember what we did to pass the time. One night the cadets decided to sneak out the ground floor window after bed check at 9 o’clock and meet in a bar downtown, which was not far. The only thing is I forgot to wake up and missed all the fun. They wouldn’t let me live that down.

One day with time to spare me and Magel went to a bar downtown and got plastered on a few Tom Collins drinks. On the way back, Magel and I were throwing peanuts in the air trying to catch them in our mouth, and the Officer in charge of our group caught us, and we had to clean the dorm for a week, and that was unbecoming of a future officer. He was a 90-day wonder and somewhat of a nerd.

I didn’t know it then, but flying the Piper Cub was quite an honor, especially today. It was almost like a glider. Miles from the field and at 2000 feet, I would pull the throttle all the way back, and it would glide forever. Most of the planes in that day did not have electric power. With the Piper Cub, someone had to spin the propeller to start the engine, hoping not to get hit with the propeller. This was known to happen.

I had only a few hours, and I thought I was pretty good. I was doing wing-over’s and other dumb things... I learned how to slip the plane while landing. Mike, my instructor, caught me doing that and chewed my rear end out. He said I was slipping the wrong direction in relation to the crosswind.

I had to take a check ride with another instructor from time to time, and he would mark us in our log book. The day I had my first check ride was with a guy named Phillips. The wind was blowing at least 20 knots, and in a Piper Cub, that was not good. We had to do Stalls, Spins, Pylon Eights which was flying around two poles on the ground spaced a few hundred feet apart. You had to stay the same distance going around each pole, so you had to adjust the angle of your bank depending in the direction of the wind. The stronger the wind, the more difficult it was. You could always expect a simulated forced landing sometime during the pylon eights. My instructor pulled the throttle back and gave me a force landing, and you are expected to find a field and bring the plane down to almost touching the ground and into the direction of the wind. While you were flying, you had to keep track of the direction of the wind at all times. My first check ride, I passed o.k. but I didn’t get a very good mark.

My instructor would do some crazy things. Another thing he did was landing the plane with extra speed on one wheel and staying on the ground the length of the runway and take off after going the length of the runway. Another time, while I was flying close to the ground, he said I got it and started chasing cows around the fields and going under telephone wires, and that scared the hell out of me, but he was an excellent flyer.

Back at the college, Mike would show up and would hit on about every girl in the place. Some of the instructors got into some trouble with the head people at the college, so they all got together and dive-bombed the college. That did not go over very good.

The word came to us that a cadet at the Naval Air Station, Glenview, Illinois, had a mid-air collision and was killed. He was from Mt. Pleasant, and the Navy wanted our class to be the pallbearers at his funeral. We did not have dress uniforms at that time, but the Navy got some white uniforms for us to wear, and I was one of the pallbearers. At the funeral, the cadet’s girlfriend was there and went out of her mind. She almost crawled into the casket. I could have disappeared from that funeral very easy. That was the first funeral I had ever attended, but would not be the last.

We finally got our prescribed 40 hours, and I passed the final check ride o.k. The marks were not the best, but they didn’t mark very high then or any time in the future. For some reason, we were not ready to go to our next training station, so we kept on flying to put in our time. We never knew where we were going until the last moment. They told us we were going to the University of Iowa for Pre-flight for 3 months.

I believe they could have done away with the Wooster college, the War Training Service at Mt Pleasant, and the Pre-Flight at Iowa, City, and we would have done just as good. I cannot remember how we traveled to Iowa, City, but I am sure we went by train. Our entire group passed the course O.K. I would like to say that not many navy pilots could say they flew the J-3 Piper Cub in the Navy. That plane is one of my favorite. The instructor and student flew tandem, which is one behind the other. One very good feature of the plane is, while flying from the front seat, you could see the wheels, and later on, when flying the Stearman N-2S bi-plane at Ottumwa, Iowa, you could also see the wheels from the front cockpit. That was always a good feature when landing.

I can not remember the train ride to Iowa. I do know every time I rode the train from Michigan west, it stopped at every city. Riding the train was very enjoyable, and the stops were long enough so you could get off and get something to eat or drink at the train station. Coming into the Dearborn Station was exciting. At the station, you could get a haircut, shoe shine, or other things. There were shops all over and only a few blocks from the center of downtown Chicago. On other longer trips, you could bribe the porters for almost anything. When you arrived at your destination, there would always be a bus or some transportation to get to your base.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter02.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter04.md)
