# Chapter Fifteen: NAS Oceana, Virginia

Our next station is at NAS Oceana and is the station where most of the famous squadrons went before they left for combat and that is what we were there for. We would be waiting to be assigned a Carrier and it would be some time before that happened. Here we would be doing dive bombing, rockets, gunnery and many other things. The trip down here was again just like the others. The air station here was then and is still the largest naval base in the United States. The runways were 8000 feet long and we didn’t need that much.

Every flight was a pickup and we did not know who we were going to fly with. Usually a Lt. J.G. would lead the flight and the Ensigns would be the last in the flight, and the further you were back, the more difficult it was to fly in formation, but no trouble. Every morning we would meet at this small building at the end of the field and inside there were only long benches and many times I would stretch out on one of these and go to sleep until time for my flight. The planes were just outside the small buildings. The main air station and large hanger were a long ways from us. I have a few pictures showing this.

I was at this base from the 1st of March to the 14th of May. I flew 56.6 hours in March, 59.6 hours in April, and 40.2 hours in May and that is a whole lot of hours. If you flew 50 hours a month that was considers a lot. We were flying 4 or 5 hours a day. We would go on a hop, come back. Refuel, rearm and go up for the next flight. One day it would be 3 flights of rockets or the next day, 3 flights of gunnery or bombing. This of course in tight 8 plane formation. I got so flying in formation was just automatic. I can’t remember any mid air collisions, but a lot of other trouble.

The air station was near the shore and close to the city of Oceana. There was a tuner Ville trolley that would go from Oceana and the beach right by the gate of the station. It was a beautiful single car that was attached to an electric cable and would wonder all over before it got to the Air Station. The beach did not have many building on it. There were some eating places, not like it is today that is full of Motels, and every thing else. Oceana was very nice in those days. In fact, every place I went was nice. No McDonalds or X rated houses etc.

Most of the guys had a car of some kind. You could get a pretty good car for 100 dollars. Norfolk was about 30 minutes from the base. We were going to practice FCLP at small out lying fields near the main base. We would be practicing the FCLP a number of times as we would be going out to the USS Charger for carrier landings where some of the most famous squadrons made their landings. By the time we arrived at the Naval Air Station, we had done quite a lot of this type of flying.

Our squadron took off joined up and flew to the out lying field that the Navy assigned to us. The landing signal officer was waiting for us at the end of the runway. We passed over him at 800 feet, went a short distance down the runway and broke off one at a time with a proper interval, dropped down to about 5o feet, slowed down to about 90 Knots with full flaps and landing gear down. We would start a turn into the runway and the LSO would instruct us with his Paddles and from then on all you looked at was the LSO and his Paddles. Or flags. If you did well, he would give you the signal to land, and then you stalled the plane, hit the runway and promptly gave full power and took off, making another circle of the field for another attempt at landing. This took an hour and a half to complete all of our landings.

There are signals for to fast, to slow, to high, to low, skidding, landing gear not down, which I already knew about. For what happened to me later on. When the LSO gave us the signal which was called a cut in which the LSO would wave the right hand flag across his chest. When he did that you cut your power and landed. You had to obey the wave off signal. If you didn’t obey the signal, you would be in a lot of trouble, especially when you were landing on a carrier.

I found out, as you were coming up the grove, as they called it, just as you got the first signal from the LSO. You made the first 2 correction really quick and if you did that, it made the landing a lot easier. The closer you got, the more difficult it was to make a correction soon enough.

On the way back to the field we would pass over the runway at 8oo feet in a right echelon and step down position which means you were lower then the plane you were following. As the flight got over the front of the runway the leader would transfer the leadership to the next guy, do a 90 degree turn and a complete circle to the landing. The way you transferred the leader ship was to pat the top of your head with you right hand and point to the next guy. This was a navy tradition. Our interval was so close that when you landed, there were 4 planes on the runway before the first one turned off. As soon as the first plane turned off he would fold his wings and the whole flight would pull into each chock and that would look just like the Blue Angles coming home. I thought it looked very impressive. With the wings being folded upwards in this plane, it looked like a flock of birds coming in.

As the planes were coming in to the final approach and the straight away, you would not have much straight direction and as soon as you straighten out, you would be touching down for your landing. In the 3 months at NAS Oceana I flew 38 gunnery flights and towed the sleeve 7 times. I said before, when you took off to tow the sleeve, you had to do it the correct way or you would damage the sleeve and then you would have to land and try it again. I remember one guy had to take the sleeve off 3 times before he got it right. I never had to do that.

There was a P-47 army base near bye and they would fly over our base really low, about 10 feet above the building and throw toilet paper all over the place. Naturally we would fly over their base going down their runways about 10 feet off the ground also.

Another time when I was flying on the wing of the skipper, we met a squadron of P-47s and they started to fool around with us. The skipper gave me the sign to follow him, we pulled to within a couple of feet the P-47 and the skipper thumbed his nose at the P-47 pilot. Where ever the army pilot went the skipper stayed right on him. The army pilot began to get a little scared. I stayed with the skipper but not as close as he was to the army pilot. Lt. Com. Wright was the best pilot I ever saw.

I was downtown Oceana about a block from the beach and was looking toward the water when a Corsair, then a P-47 with about 5 or six of each following each other about 10 feet off the water, traveling down the beach going about 300 miles per hour or faster. What they didn’t know was the Skipper was at a party on the beach with Admiral A. C. Read who was giving a party. He was known as a first class ass hole. He was also the pilot of the NC-4, the only plane to first fly the Atlantic in 1919 and he got many medals from Spain and the British. He was the only one of 4 planes to make it. He said to Lt. Com. Wright, get their names. It took about a week before our pilots admitted that they were the ones. This happened just before we were leaving the base for California. All of us got 3 days leave, and they were put on a troop train straight to California. One of the pilots was Lt. Robert Brewer who stayed in the Navy after the war and only got to be A Commander before he retired. He was written up in his Navy flight jacket for the beach incident and he thinks that is the reason he didn’t go to a higher in rank. Probable not true. Not every officer got to be a Captain. The skipper always told us not to let the P-47s get the best of you. Admiral A.C. Read was Naval Aviator # 24 and was Commandant of NAS Pensacola in 1942.

We were getting ready for carrier landings on the USS Charger and on the 17th of March I flew two flights of Field Carrier Landing Practice. Where the field was I didn’t know. It was impossible to practice FCLP at the main air station because of the huge traffic problem like at NAS Jacksonville with a plane landing every 3 minutes for 3 years. I guess I did o.k. on the practice.

The next day 4 of us went to the USS Charger to make 8 landings. They only sent 4 of us at a time, instead of 8. This worked better and was a shorter traffic pattern. I made all 8 landings with out a wave off. I only got one wave off after my landings in Chicago and that was at night. The next 4 days I had two gunnery flights and towed the sleeve once and a 2.7 flight at night.

The night flights were very intense having to stay in formation and staring at the lights for at least 2 hours. Easy to get vertigo. In fact I did get vertigo, as we were letting down for our landing. Instead of a smooth let down, the leader came down very steep and in a sharp turn most of the way. I really didn’t believe you could get vertigo. We had meetings showing us how this could happen and staring to long was one way you could get it. We were told to look at the lights on plane you were flying on and shift your eyes really quick to another area and back again. As we were letting down, I noticed that I was all alone and was following a light on a ship out to sea. If you look in some distance, the lights seem to be at the same level as you are. I got out of my trance, realizing what was happening and made it back to the base on my own. One of the guys asked me where I had gone and I made some excuse. I told you about the 2 cadets that flew in formation into the ground at Pensacola. Night flying is not for the timid.

On the 24th, 4 of us were on our way to the carrier and about half way there a Captain on a destroyer in the Bay called us on the radio and asked us if we could make some passes on the Destroyer so they could train their guns on us. No sooner had he finished his message, we were on our way down from about 5000 feet going single file with a short space between us. We passed the destroyer just a few feet above their super structure, climbed straight up to the 5000 feet, rolled over on our backs and came down again and again. That is the most fun I ever had flying. When we were through, the Captain called us and said that we did a super job and thanked us. I think the Captain of the Destroyer called the skipper and him what a good job we did. When we got back to the base the skipper said “what the hell were you guys doing” as this was against all the rules. We just said we were obeying out superiors. We went on to the carrier and made 4 landings in about 15 minutes with no wave offs and the Captain of the carrier called us and said we did a super job. Lt Robert Brewer was along on this flight and every time I called him on the phone in recent years, he would bring this story up and the P-47 deal also. I guess you don’t forget these special events.

On the 27th of March we had a Field Carrier Landing practice at night. The night before we were to make our two night landing on the carrier. FCLP at night will separate the men from the boys. I would say that it would be close to the most dangerous flying you could do. This would be at an auxiliary field also. There were no lights on the runway and trees all over the place. We did our usual break off to get our interval and would do touch and goes until we finished. Just before we were coming up the grove, we had to drop down lower than the trees in our approach. The only lights were the florescent suit the LSO and his Paddles had. We all made it o.k. which I think we were pretty lucky. This is why the test for your eye sight was so important and the color blindness test for sure. If you couldn’t tell the red light on the right wing and green on the left wing, you would not know which side of the plane you would be on.

The reason we had to make 2 landings on the carrier at night was in early June 1944 in the carrier battle of the Philippine Sea and what was called the Marianas Turkey Shoot June 19-20. There was a battle that started on the 19th of June with an attack on task force 58 by Japanese land-based planes from Guam and Truk. Hellcat fighters from our carriers destroyed 35 enemy fighters and bombers .The remainder of battle was fought by 430 Japanese carrier planes attacking the 450 planes of task force 58 in four fierce waves. At the end of the eight hour onslaught, only 100 of the Japanese enemy planes returned to their carriers. The rest had been destroyed in the most decisive aerial combat in history. All of the planes from task force 58 took off late in the day and they knew they would not get back before it turned dark. None of the pilots had been qualified in night carrier landings. When planes were coming back to the carrier and straggling in groups of two or three. Planes started to go down in the water. Others planes circled, trying to find their carriers. It was then that Vice Admiral Marc Mitscher gave a four word order that made him the most beloved admiral in the Navy. “Turn on the lights”. Immediately, every ship in the fleet turned on its searchlights and pointed the beams skyward. The glow from nearly 200 searchlights could be seen for a hundred miles. Many pilots were lost. The planes were landing on any carrier they could find and a lot of the planes crashed and burst into flames. One of the pilots called on the radio and said you are going to lose one of the best pilots in the Navy, and was not seen again. Because of the huge number of Japanese planes, there were over 20 pilots who became aces. This is where Com. David McCampbell became the top scoring ace in the Navy with 37 planes shot down, most of them in this battle. This was so historic, that if you type Admiral Marc Mitscher and Turn on the lights in the computer, you will get the whole story. After this, the navy came out with a directive saying every navy pilot will have to make two landings at night on a carrier.

The landings on the carrier at night were bad enough, but practicing on the out lying fields at night was far worse. There were 70 aircraft that crashed in the water during the battle of the Philippine Sea. On the 27th of March we had two flights of FCLP
Continuing the conversion to Markdown:

at an auxiliary field and the next day we went out to the carrier, the USS Charger in the Chesapeake Bay. To make our night landings In order to get to the carrier, we were directed by radar from the carrier, plus some navigation from our group.

On the carrier each deck hand had only his job to do. They worked as a team and you had to follow their order to the tee. As you were coming up the grove, there were 3 deck hands with the LSO and they each of them had there job to do. As the plane was coming in for the final approach, one of the deck crew would be saying deck fouled, and keep repeating that phrase until the deck was clear of the previous plane that had landed. another crewman would be saying wheels down, tail hook down as the LSO had all he could do to bring the plane in. In the center of the carrier there were 3 sets of two Cables propeller high going across the deck. There was a deck hand that could drop the 3 set of cables that would go down flat with the deck. There were usually 11 wires that your hook on the plane could catch. To catch anyone of the wires would be alright. If you caught the 11th wire you could still go into the barrier or cables. If you missed all of the arresting gear cables and went into the barrier, you would probably flip over on the back of the plane and that would be the end of the landings for that time.

Also our interval was 30 seconds apart and the pilots did there best to stick to that. As soon as you plane hit the deck, another deck hand would be standing to the right of the plane and his job was to give you the hook up signal and pointing to the front of the ship, you would give full throttle to get past the barrier which was down by then, and as soon as you passed that area, the deck hand would raise the barrier and the deck hand with the LSO would tell him the deck cleared and the next plane would be landing just as the plane cleared the barrier. A lot of things could happen and did. If the Plane landing would hit too hard and bounced over the barrier, he could land on top of the plane that had just cleared the barrier. There were cases of a plane taking a wave off too late and the hook would catch the barrier prop high and come crashing to the deck ripping the tail off the plane

You got pretty good giving full throttle to go past the barrier. You would have to pull the throttle back and start getting on the breaks like right now. If you are doing landings and take offs for each landing, the flag officer would give you signals to go to the spot for take off. This was done with much speed to keep the 30 second interval. The flag officer would get you to the spot, give you the full throttle signal and when you tail was starting to bounce of the deck he signaled you to take off. All this was done so fast you hardly had time to thing of anything else.

If you were in the ready room and you got the signal to man your planes, there would be a different procedure to follow. I will tell this later. I know in combat this was an intense time. We had lectures for this all the time, plus the LSO would give us the business after the each flight and he could ream anybody’s ass out including an Admiral. I know today there are only 3 wires as there current system is so accurate. If today you don’t meet the requirements. You will be gone from carrier operation.

One of our pilots, Ensign Daily would have a bad time coming up the grove. If you drew a line straight down the middle of the deck into space, you were not supposed to go to the right of the line and you would get a wave off. This is what Ensign Daily would do a lot and the skipper would ream his ass out. After arriving at the carrier, we would travel down the right side of the carrier at 800 feet altitude and break off to get our 30 second intervals. Getting down to 50 feet off the water in the dark was a bit harrowing. One of the methods you used going down wind before you got to the grove was to sight at your left wing tip and put it so you could see the carrier at the tip of the wing like sighting a gun to a target, and that got you the right spacing and distance from the carrier. It got pretty easy after while. Like I said, getting set up really quick helps out a lot. I use to go up in the island at the top and watch landings. You have never seen anything so exciting for both take offs and landings. My first landing was really good. I got a wave off on the second try and made the third one o.k. There were only 4 of us and when we were finished, we joined up and went back to the base. I was really happy to get that out of the way. Some of the guys had to go back a second time to qualify.

One of the pilots in our air group forgot to put his tail hook down and the deck hands did not catch it. He hit the deck, bounced over the barrier and into the water at the end. A Small ship always followed at the rear of the carrier and to the right. The ship picked the pilot up out of the water. They got him out so fast he hardly had time to get wet. I can’t remember who that was.

On our bombing flights, we would go to a target that was on the beach in a safe area. The target was a white circle about 200 feet in dia. For each flight there would be one of us of the flight of 8 who would fly around the target at 1000 feet and record the hits of the other 7 pilot’s dropping their bombs. The pilots would start their run about 20,000 feet and would have a close interval coming down, so the pilot marking the hits would have his hands full and mark the hits one, two, three etc. so that way you would know each pilots score. There would be someone on the ground watching us and would be in radio contact. We were supposed to dive at an angle of 70 degrees or steeper. In order to do that we had to have the plane pointed straight down as the wind would move you and this would take away some of the angle. They would call me and tell me I was not steep enough and the only way I could get more of an angle was to fly inverted.

One of the crazy things that was done was Lt Dierker would fly the formation in a dive right at the tower and just before we got to the tower about 50 feet high, Lt. Dierker would call the tower and ask for permission to buzz the tower just as we were going bye. He could get away with it being a full Lt. The skipper would always keep tabs on the pilots to see if they made tail first landings as if you were landing on a carrier and you would hear about it. Once we caught him making a wheel first landing and as he was walking back, we gave him the business, but all he did was raise his pant legs like he was walking through shit. He was funny sometimes.

On one bombing mission, a pilot named Ensign Berry was the one who was doing the scoring. He was flying around the target when he lost altitude for not paying attention and his wing hit the water just off shore, He did some cart wheels and crashed in the water just off shore. He got out of the plane o.k. and got into his life raft, and inflated it, but he must have hit his head and had trouble getting into the life boat. When he got in the raft, he would keep falling out of it. The waves were pretty high. The leader of the flight was Lt. John Dierker and he called for a flying boat to come and pick Ensign Berry out of the water. When the flying boat got there which was a PBM, a rather large plane. It was bigger than a PBY which was one of the main flying boats of the war. The PBM flew around the area but would not land the plane because the pilot said the water was to rough. Lt. Dierker got on the radio and what he said to the pilot was not repeatable. Some more time went bye and you could tell that Ensign Berry was not doing good. Finally Lt. Dierker was going to land his plane in the water beside Berry, jump out and try to help him. He was in his approach and about ready to land in the water when the pilot of the flying boat said he would land and pick the pilot up. It took some more time for him to do this and finally landed and got the pilot aboard. Again it was too late as Ensign Berry had drowned by that time. This was the second of our group to get killed. There was a memorial for him and Jake Apelbaum took his body to his home. Jake lives in Akron, Ohio, which is near me and we have lunch together every two or three weeks. He is now 84 years old and can hardly walk. He may be going around in a wheel chair soon. He drives o.k. but I am a little scared to ride with him, so I do the driving when I can. Because he took Ensign Berry to his home to be buried, he missed his chance to qualify on the carrier at night. He would have to qualify later and I will have more to tell about that. He told me about the funeral of Ensign Berry and how sad it was, especially when he gave the flag to his mother.

My memory is not too good about some of the things we did when we were not flying. We had to keep busy some way. We use to gather in one of the rooms and have bull sessions. Some of the time we would play back gammon, mostly for 50 cents a game. Back Gammon was a standard game for the navy and was in all of the ready rooms, the board would be painted on all of the tables, both on land and in the ready rooms on the carriers. In combat the squadron would wait in the ready rooms for hours waiting for their call to man their planes. They would be dressed in their flying gear at that time and could be playing cards or back gammon or just sleeping.

When one of our flights would land and as they were coming in to the chocks, they would be folding there wings and that was a pretty sight. There is a plane captain that brings you into the chocks with hand signals. Everything you do on the ground with the plane is directed by some ground crew. When you shut the engine off you, you first increase the throttle to about 10 inches of mercury; pull the mixture back and the engine cuts out. I always liked to do that. The sound is something you don’t forget, especially when the 13 foot propeller stops rotating.

Just as the engine quit, I looked in front of the plane and saw my twin brother Don standing there. Was I surprised? He just shows up without telling any one. Don was stationed at Camp Perry, Virginia and was a Pharmacist Mate 1st class. He had enlisted in the navy 3 months before the war started and was in San Diego, California when the war started and it wasn’t long before he was overseas and was stationed near Guadalcanal. He was there for a couple of years and saw most of the wounded that came from the islands. At this time, he was back from overseas and was going to school to learn more medical facts etc. My friends were surprised to see someone that looked just like me. Don wanted to know if I could take him for a plane ride and I said that was no problem. I checked out a SNJ for the ride. Don really enjoyed the flight and I think he would have made a very good pilot.

While he was at the base, the squadron was going to have a party in Norfolk Virginia and I got permission to take him to the party. Like most of the parties, there was a lot of drinking and it gets out of hand a lot. My skipper got so drunk, that he was dancing without shoes on. another incident happened that really pissed me off. I had the duty one day and at about 5 o’clock I left to go into town. Every body had gone their own way and there was no one to take messages. When other officers had the duty, especially the married, they would go into town or where ever they lived. Sometime during the evening, a message came in from the USS Charger and they wanted 4 planes to make landings at 9 o’clock in the morning. I was the one who was supposed to take the message. When I showed up in the morning I got holy shit. They gave me the duty for a full week and I had to stay over night at the base. I was lucky to get off with only that much punishment. Lt Stockstead, who was in personal and not a pilot gave me the business and told me I should have read the bulletin board. He also said the whole bunch of us was smart asses and I guess he was right. When you are young you do things like that and the older officer’s get upset. I found out Lt Stockstead was an alcoholic and after the war, he committed suicide. I think something as important as staying over night when you had the duty should have been discussed in a meeting. Our squadron should have been out to the West coast long before this and finally we got our order to go to San Francisco, California to the NAS Alameda.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter14.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter16.md)
