# Chapter Fourteen: N.A.S. Wildwood, New Jersey and the Commissioning of Air Group 95

Wildwood was on a slim strip of land and not much distance from the Atlantic and the Delaware Bay. I had never flown a Hellcat before but now it didn’t matter, as they all flew the same. The Corsair pilots called the Hellcat an old women’s plane. The Air Station at Wildwood was a very nice field. There were 4 runways so most of the landings were cross wind landings, but no big deal. We were commissioned at NAS Wildwood and they took a group picture of us and that would be the first of 3 group pictured taken. The first 17.6 hours of flying was recorded in my log book as Carrier Aircraft Service Unit 24 and in that time I logged 4.1 hours in instrument flying in an SNJ, and was recorded in my log book as qualified in instrument flying.

My address from now on would be Fighting Squadron 95 c/o fleet post office, New York, N.Y. and this would QUALIFY me for the Asiatic Pacific Campaign Medal, the same as being overseas. At this base we would do mostly gunnery practice. The officer of the day would find out what planes would be operating and assign them to us which would be a flight of 8, as usual. Lt. Robert Brewer told the skipper and others that we should not be flying over the ocean as the planes were too old, especially in the winter time. They were the models from Chance Vought and Goodyear Corp. It seemed that every time we went up. Someone would have trouble. One Day we heard that one of the pilots from our squadron was coming in for a landing and he must have stalled out in his approach and crashed on the runway. The plane broke apart and they found the pilot strapped to the seat in the cockpit that had came loose from the rest of the plane and was lying upside down on the runway. It was days before he regained consciousness and he never remembered anything to do with the flight, not even when he took off. They transferred him to a hospital and I believe out of the navy. What happened, no one knows. It could have been anything, some mechanical failure, pilot error, or he might have passed out. I have a picture of him standing in from of a very old corsair.

There are a lot of things I don’t remember. The mess hall was in a large building for the officers. The waiters were Philippine sailors. The food was very good and they did not serve powered eggs like they did when I was a cadet. You even had some what of a choice and as much as you could eat. I would always rate the food for officers as very good.

We were assigned to a barracks for officers with one roommate and I can’t remember who that was. There were 55 pilots in our squadron and each day we would be assigned to 7 other pilots for that flight and this would change every day. It wasn’t until the Hawaiian Islands, that they assigned us to a permanent group of 8 and we stayed that way until the end of the war. Our squadron would not join the other 3 squadrons until Hilo, Hawaii. These squadrons were training at other fields and it was amazing how they finally got us together as an Air group. I believe that our Air group was the first to fly the corsair at Wildwood NAS.

The field was almost on the Delaware Bay and a very short distance from the town of Wildwood. Wildwood city was a beautiful city and was a resort that many people gathered there in the summer time. In Jan. of course the town was mostly empty. There was a Naval Air Station at Cape May which was a short distance south of wildwood. We flew down there twice to practice field carrier landings, which we did quite often, just in case we had to land on a carrier. Each time we went there, we stayed over night at the officers club and there was always a bit of drinking. Where ever we went, there was never a lack of booze.

One day a flight of Corsair was taxing out to the runway and they were ziging back and forth, and the reason was that was the only way you could see the plane in front of you while taxing. While doing that a High Wing Howard plane taxied into one of the corsairs and the 13-foot prop on the Corsair Sliced through the cockpit of the Howard and cut the legs off the pilot. He died shortly after that. Every time something like that happened we tried not to think too much of it. You couldn’t let these accidents get you down, because it happened so often. It seemed that there were a percentage of accidents that happened, and you could not stop it. Even when you got back to your room or where ever you were going, you did not talk about what happened. At no time did I think of something happening to my plane, like the engine cutting out, or the wings falling off or many other ways to get into trouble.

In the month of January I flew 17.6 hours and 31.6 hours in the month of February and if we got in 20 days out of each month flying, we would be doing well. On one flight out group decided to fly up to the New York area just fooling around. One of the pilot’s named ensign Parker who we called Yo Yo because he flew so close he would be over correcting. The squadron asked us to turn in a nick name we wanted to be called. This was tradition and remains the same today. Some of the nick names of some of our pilots were Nero, L.D. D.L. The skipper was called Sugar Dog after his name Spencer Downs Wright and the name Downs was a family name and everyone called him Downs from other squadrons and all of his friends he knew form other years. Other names were Gunner, Humpy, Deacon, Whiskey Joe, Fussy, Deac, Mouse, La Duke, Honest Joe, Duke, buzz, and his name was James Sawyer. Cisco, Yogie, and I were called Mac.

While we were on this flight, up to New Your, Ensign Parker wanted to fly close enough to touch wings and like a bunch of dummies we did that. It was not as difficult as you would think. Two planes would go into a gentle turn and at a slight angle, one of the planes would get just a little above the other. While in the turn, the lower plane would fly smooth and with no movement. The other plane would fly until the two wings were just over one another. Then the top plane would gently drop his wing and bounce it off the other plane. Needless to say Ensign Parker was a dare devil, which eventually did him in.

One of the other pilots flying with us was Ensign Francis Yanoshik, who we called the mad Russian, or Yogie. As we were flying in formation, I noticed black smoke coming out from the rear of the tail on his plane. I radioed him and told him about it. I could only be one of two things. You could be losing your oil, or a hydraulic leak. I told him he better go back to the base right away, but he said there was nothing wrong. There had to be something wrong so I told him again that he should go back to the base and he finally agreed. At that time I, did not find out what happened to Yanoshik. A couple of years ago, maybe 2002 or close, called him on the phone, He lived near Washington and I reminded him of the incident and he told me that he went back to the base, did not call the tower for landing instructions, barged right in the traffic pattern and landed. Just as he touched down on the runway, the engine froze up because of the lack of oil. He said, thanks a lot Mac, I sure was lucky I wasn’t killed. This would happen again to another pilot later on at another station.

In the Month of February would be the first time that we fired Rockets. They were called 5 inch rockets as that was the diameter. of the rocket. In the cockpit we had switches that would enable us to fire them one or two at a time, or all of them at once. When you fired them, smoke would come out the end and disappear under the plane and it looked like the rocket was doing that, but the rocket went so fast you couldn’t see it go. We only fired rockets 4 times at Wildwood, but would fire many more in the future.

Gunnery would still be the main thing we did. Like at Pensacola, to be a fighter pilot, gunnery was the most important phase. There was always a lot of trouble that could happen. The Sailors who loaded the guns had to be sure that the Bullets were all the same size. If they were not, the guns would jam. The guns on the planes had to be bore sighted. The armors would prop the plane like it was in level flight, and sight the guns to converge at 1000 feet, so if you fired before the 1000 from the target, or after the 1000 feet the bullet would be going in a wide arc from left to right. We had switches for the guns also, and would only fire 2 guns at a time, usually inboard, center, or outboard. When you fired at the target, you only fired 5 or 6 rounds at a time. If you fired more, it would burn out the rifling and the bullet would go all over the place. This happened many times to me and also the jamming. To get to know what was going on, we had to load our own guns from time to time. You laid the sleeves of bullets out on the runway and walked up and down and checked to see if the bullets were all the same. In the sleeve of bullets, every third one was a tracer, so you could see were they were going when you fired them. Some of the guys would turn off all of the guns except one, and instead of firing at 1000 feet which was what you were suppose to do; they would fire the one gun all the way to the target following the tracers. If you got caught, you could get in trouble. Someone watching your plane firing could tell very easy, how many shot you fired. I know in combat, the pilot did not care how long he fired. He was only interested in shooting down the Japes. If you see on T.V. planes firing you know they kept the trigger down a long time. I would. We had gun cameras and would view the film after the flight. Each gun would hold 200 rounds of ammunition, so all told; you could carry 1600 runs of ammunition. Firing only two guns at a time, the ammunition would last a long time. I only fired all 8 guns once, just fooling around. If you couldn’t hit with two guns, you would be pretty bad gunner.

While at NAS Wildwood, we only flew 4 gunnery hops. Other flights were tactical, navigation, carrier practice and rockets. A lot of the time we were just up flying around in formation and building up time. The big thing we were waiting for was our order to be assigned to a carrier and the Fleet. Some of the pilots were ordered directly to the fleet as replacements and that is what happened to Ensign Liles. He would be attached to the USS Intrepid and would see a lot of combat. He is one of the eight that I took operational training at Jacksonville with. More on him later. Every time we went on a gunnery hop, we would be assigned a plane by the duty officer. We had to take turns having that duty. The officer would go out to the flight line and see what planes were available. He would then assign them to each of the pilots for that flight. It was like a lottery. You would be lucky to get a plane that was in good shape. One out of 8. Again the planes were old and not in good shape.

One of the gunnery flights we went on was over the Delaware bay and as usual, we went to our planes, started them and taxied out to the runway single file and turning left and right so we could see the plane in front of us. The tow plane had already left and we would meet him in the planed area. Towing the sleeve was still the most dangerous part of flying. We would take off one at a time with a proper interval, and then we would join up in formation and fly to meet the tow plane. After about a few passes at the sleeve, one of the pilots by the name of Ensign Orville Thorson called us on the radio and said his engine quit. This was January 1945 and the temperature was very low. When his engine quit, it was like the kiss of death. You knew instantly that you would not make it alive. His thoughts would be I am not going to see my mother or my family ever or any other things you would do as the years go by. As he was going down, we all got in a circle and turned on our IFF which mean identification friend or foe on which was a signal to the coast guard so they would be able to locate the plane form the signal. We also called them on the radio. If you were in a warm climate, there was no trouble landing in the water, getting in your life boat and waiting to be picked up. The pilot was setting on the parachute and on top of the chute was a unit about 6 inches thick with the life boat in it and a large knife, water and some candy bars. If you bailed out, the chute package would be gone, leaving the life boat package strapped to the harness. But, when you rode the plane into the water, you had the whole unit together and the only way you could get to the life boat was to jump in the water and separate the two, so you could inflate the life boat. This took precious time, which you didn’t have. The pilot made a good landing and we could see he got the two units separated and had inflated his life rafe, but that is as far as he got. We could see his head dropping into the water. I guess the cold got to him and he didn’t have the strength to get into raft. A Flying boat finally got there and picked him up. It took about 35 minutes for them to get there which was about as good as they could do. We flew back to the base not knowing the out come, and we thought he would be o.k. I was standing on the field when I saw an ambulance coming to the Administration area and we found out that Orville did not make it. The cold was too much for him. So what Lt Brewer ask the skipper to not send us out over the cold ocean because of the poor condition of the planes, came true. This was the first pilot in our squadron to die.

I don’t remember who took his body to his home, but I do know all family he had was his mother and the shock was so bad, they had to take her to the hospital. It’s the family that suffers the most. Before the war would end we lost 10 pilots that I can remember. The other 3 squadrons did not join us until Hawaii, so they trained 6 months somewhere else and I don’t know the number of accidents they had in that time. I am sure there were many. Back to the accident of Ensign Orville Thurston.

When you engine cuts out over the water, you have two choices. The first is to ride the plane done and land in the water or the land. If you are over water and the weather is warm, I think, landing the plane in the water is the best way. We are trained what to do in either case. When you are getting in the plane getting ready for your flight, there are 3 very important things you must do. The navy fitted us with a parachute harness for each of us and with our name printed on it. Before you went to the plane you put this harness on. Getting into the plane the first thing you did was to hook the harness to the chute and seat pack. There is a long strap about 4 or 5 feet long attached to the seat pack, and you hook the strap to your harness. The reason for this is when you are in the water the seat back won’t drift away from you and then you will have no life boat. The second thing you do is turn on the master switch and check how much gas you have and if not a full tank, you don’t take that plane. If you bail out, and as the chute opens up, you still have the seat pack if you attached the strap to you parachute harness.

I think over water during the winter, I would bail out because your Shute is open, leaving the seat pack with you heading down. Now, as you go into the cold water, you have to work as fast as you can to open the seat back, inflate it and crawl into it. I believe I could do it faster that way. Its a choice you have to make and it better be the right one when your life depends on it.

There is an article on the web that tells the story of NAS Wildwood and is titled “Naval Air Station Wildwood at War 1943-1945 and is written by Jeffrey M. Dorwart, Rutgers University. There were 41 airman killed during that time and he lists all of them and what they were flying, the date and where it happened. One of those was Ensign Orville Thorson of Minnesota of our Air Group. The time at Wildwood was very pleasant and the town was a good place to wail away you time. Wildwood New Jersey was a famous resort for people to vacation in the summer time.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter13.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter15.md)
