# Chapter Sixteen: On our Way to California and Possibly to Combat

I had a 3-day leave before I was to report to NAS Alameda The trip by train across the country was again very boring, a conformable way to travel. Just sleeping most of the way. I left Oceana about the 22 of May and reported to Alameda the 26th of May 1945. We were there only a couple of days when we got orders to report to the NAS Twenty Nine Palms, California for rocket training. We were there to shoot 6 tiny Tim rockets which were 16 feet long and weighed 1000 lbs. Why we went to NAS Alameda and then to Twenty Nine Palms were a mystery. NAS Twenty Nine Palms was 450 miles south of San Francisco and 100 miles East of Las Angles. We could have gone to Twenty Nine Palms first and would have saved a lot of time and traveling. My thinking is, we were supposed to get a carrier at San Francisco and go to combat and something happened to change their minds.

We left Alameda the 1st of June and were transported to the air station at Twenty nine palms. We went to Twenty Nine Palms in a C-47 twin engine plane. It took 2 planes to get all of us to the air station. The plane traveled over the Sierra Nevada mountain range and across the length of the Mojave Desert. This was close to highway 10. I thought the plane was going to brake up and crash. The thermals were so bad; I couldn’t even stay on my seat which was a flat bench. The plane landed just before I got sick. The runway at the field was made of heavy wire mesh that is laid on the desert floor. There was only one runway so you could be making a cross wind landings some of the time During June, the weather was very hot and there were a lot of thermals in the air making it impossible to fly in the afternoon. The thermals could shake the plane almost to pieces. You would have to have your shoulder harness on very tight. Before we shot the tiny Tim rockets, we had to fire the HARV 5 inch rockets and that was on the 5th, 6th 7th and 8TH OF June. We flew early in the morning and quit flying at 12 o’clock noon because of the heavy updrafts and thermals. Our approach to landings was always the same. The first turn into runway was very sharp and steep and as you were coming into the final approach, there was a less of a bank. This looked scary from the ground but was the safest way to land. We scared the hell out of the guy in the tower who was screaming at us about the crazy way we landed. We always had 4 planes on the runway before the first on turned off and we pulled into the chocks while folding our wings and it looked very impressive.

On the 8th of June I fired 2 tiny Tim’s. The tiny Tim rockets were 16 feet long and weighted 1000 pounds. When you carried two of those rockets, which would be 2000 lbs, it would feel like you were flying behind a barn door. A B-25 twin engine medium bomber would only carry a little more than this. On the 9th I fired 4 tiny Tim’s. I made 2 flights to do this. I know the carriers were being stocked with these rockets. The USS Franklyn was carrying these rockets when it was hit with bombs and started to explode with the tiny Tim’s going off all over the place. This happened while we were at Twenty Nine Palms in June and this was the reason we didn’t get this ship. Not many pilots could say they fired tiny tims.

In the mean time, out pilots being bored tried to do different things to pass the time of day. One of these was to get a jeep and with 4 guys loaded with 45 calibers pistols, would go out into the desert to shoot jack rabbits. Some of the pilots were standing around looking at the mountain ranges and would get into an argument about how far they were form us. One of the guys would say he could get there in 30 minutes and then they would bet on it. One of the pilots was picked to run to the mountain range and the rest would bet whether he could or could not make it. Some times he would and other times he wouldn’t make it in time.

Our barracks were one story buildings on a cement slab and looked a lot like a motel. One day one of the pilots got caught fooling around with one of the nurses in the outdoor handball court. His wife had a fit, but she got over it. What was she going to do? She said she loved him any way.

I know the marines in combat fired the tiny Tims at targets on an island directed by marines on the ground. They would start their run going into the target at a slight angle, like they would be strafing. When we fired the rockets we went into a steep dive, 70 degrees or more and that was a stupid way to do it. I never found out where my rockets hit and was happy to get it over with.

Now this is unbelievable. We got our orders to go back to NAS Alameda. Some of the pilots had cars and would travel in groups to their destinations. Not having a car I had to travel to Alameda on the train. If you watch the old movies you can see the train station at Los Angles California. One of our pilots, Lt. J.g. Eugene Schierenberg checked out a SBC Helldiver and he and I flew to Las Angles and landed at some airport a long ways from downtown L.A. and I took a street car to the train station in downtown L.A, which took a long time? As I was traveling on the street car I noticed that that the stop signs had a long arm that would flip out horizontal and a loud bell would ring. One arm would say stop and the other one would say go. These arms were about 2 feet long. How antique. My train trip was to San Francisco and across the bay to NAS Alameda. This is where all of us met and we found out we were going to Hawaii on the USS Wasp. The navy had small boats going back and forth from Alameda to San Francisco and I did that a few times before we left.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter15.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter17.md)
