# Chapter Seventeen: Our Trip on the USS Wasp to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii

When we boarded the ship, they assigned us our sleeping quarter. The officers with a higher rank shared a room with another officer and had much better quarters than the lower ranked officers. They assigned me to a room with a full Lt. and my bed was a cot in the center of the room and that is where I stayed until we got to Hawaii, which would take 5 days. It was always a great sight to see how the carrier got under way. A couple of tug boats would hook up to the carrier and transport the carrier out of the bay to open waters away from incoming and out coming traffic. As soon as we got to the proper area, the tug boats released the carrier and with horns blowing and we would head out to sea. We traveled under the Oakland bay bridge and then under the Golden Gate bridge to the Pacific Ocean.

Not long after we had left the bay, the weather turned very bad. The waves were flying over the deck and the carrier was going back and forth to the left and right and the hanger deck railing was going into the water. If you were standing on the hanger deck near the railing, you could touch the water with your hands. If the weather was good, you would be 10 or 15 feet above the water line. I was in the officer’s lounge looking at a Life magazine when a sailor told me not to pay attention to what the ship was doing and you would not get sick. Wrong, as that didn’t work for me and it wasn’t long before a sailor and I were throwing up at the railing on the hanger deck. I was sick for 2 days before I started coming out of it. The ship was going back and forth so much that the water was coming out of the toilets and all over the deck. The experienced sailor told us that this was the worst weather that had happened in a long time.

After a while I would go up to the flight deck and take deep breaths hoping I wouldn’t get sick again. It took quite a while traveling around the carrier before I learned where to go. There was a focal bunk room in the bow of the carrier that had about 15 double deck bunks and quite large with a table in the center of the room. This is where a card game would be going 24 hours a day and night. It was impossible to get some sleep. The lights never went out. Card games were always going on regardless where you were. The pilots couldn’t live with out this.

After about 3 days out to sea, the carrier started to perform flight operations and air group 86, the permanent air group would practice most of the way across the ocean to Hawaii. This was the air group’s second tour. The carrier had two sets of 5 inch guns mounted in the front and in the rear and twin 50 caliber guns mounted in the cat walk from about the center to the rear of the ship. In the island at all levels, there were 40 twin millimeter guns or sometimes called pom-poms. One day I was standing in one of the 40 millimeter gun mounts, when all of the guns started shooting at a drone going by the carrier about 2000 feet high. I couldn’t hear for sometime. Early in the morning, flight operations would start with catapulting the front planes and then the rest would take off under their own power. The noise was tremendous. No sleeping when this was going on. This would happen two or 3 times a day. They didn’t give the air group any rest. Air group 86 flew the same type of planes that we did. They flew Corsairs, Hellcats, Helldivers, and torpedo planes. Our air group had 180 pilots and 133 crewmen. The torpedo planes had a crew of 3 and the helldiver had 2 crewmen. This whole group stayed together until the end of the war.

I would go up into the island and watch the operations, both landings and launging of the planes. This was the most interesting part of the operation that you could see. I have already said something about the landings of the planes and the launching, or take offs of the air group. The interval in take offs was faster than 30 seconds. In combat, when they would sound the alarm over the load speakers, Pilots, man your planes and the pilots and crewmen, already in their flight gear would dash for the entrance to the flight deck. Every plane would have a plane captain and he would give you the signal to start the engine. If you had trouble in starting the engine, the Captain of the ship who was in the upper part of the island would wait only a couple of minutes. If the plane would not start, the Captain would order the deck hands to push the plane over board. Nothing was allowed to happen that would slow the launching of the planes. This would put a lot of stress on the pilot and sometimes he would give the signal that everything was o.k. when it was not. Everything was timed. I was lucky that my engine started every time. This happened quite often in combat.

I was up early every morning to watch the flight operations. One morning, when it came time for this pilot to get into position for take off, he gave the signal that that his oil pressure had not come up to the proper spot on the dial, which was in the area that was colored green. When you got into the cockpit and started the engine, the oil gage was the first thing you looked at. If it wasn’t right, you shut the engine off right then. Seems like, after a while, most plane leaked oil somewhere. The Captain was getting upset and the pilot knew this. I know what he was feeling. At the time I knew who the pilot was but can not remember now who he was. The pilot decided to take a chance and gave the plane captain the thumbs up sign that he was ready to go and they let him take off. As soon as he cleared the end of the deck, his engine cut out and he went into the water quite steep and then disappeared along the side of the carrier and then to the rear. It would take the destroyer quite a few minutes to get to plane and to pick him up. The plane went under the water almost instantly and the pilot did not get out. This was the first of many accidents that would happen before we got to Hawaii. The pilot of the downed plane was on his 3rd cruise on his own request. Usually, you only had to make 2 cruises into combat.

To watch the coordination of the deck crew was something that was very exciting. Each crewman had his own job to do. They had to go to school to learn their specialty. Where the LSO, the landing signal officer stood, their was a shield behind him so the wind would not push him out of place and to the right of him and a few feet lower was a net that he could jump into if a plane was coming at him. That was better than jumping into the water. When the incoming pilot was not answering his signals sometimes he would walk out to the center of the deck and be more emphatic with his signals and the incoming pilot knew the LSO was upset. When the pilot got a wave off, he must add throttle instantly, make a left turn and get the hell out of there and then come around for another try.

Half of the squadrons had previous combat experience and when you were in the ready room, or in the barracks, the younger pilot would be pumping the veterans, trying to find out some of their experiences. It was on this carrier that I bought the knife that I carried with me in the plane. The knife was a safety factor in case you had to cut your way out of the airplane, or when you went down in the ocean, you could use it for anything needing cutting. Some of the pilots had fancy knives and special helmets of all colors. Some of the guys had high boots etc. The conditions on the ship were first class. Years later, my twin brother was looking at a life magazine showing the dining room on the carrier during the war. The tables had linen table cloths and there were waiters for us. He asked me if that was the way it was when I was there and I said it sure was and he said “you son of a bitch”. Can you imagine going to war with luxury like that with soldiers fighting in the worst of conditions and sleeping in fox holes? We didn’t have it to bad, but the risks were not good. When the carrier was traveling, most of the flight operations were done so the ship could practice what they would do in combat, but mostly the carrier wanted to practice their operations.

On the second day out when they were lounging planes on the catapults, one of the pilots was just getting the signal that they were going to shoot him off, when he notice that the red tab on his wings was still sticking up and you could see the expression on his face that he had made a mistake. If the red tab was sticking up, it was a signal that the wings would not be locked. The pilot has a hand lever in the cockpit to pull up and then the red tabs on the wings would go down, indicating that the wings were locked. The red tabs do not lock the wings as they lock automatically. If you pull the lever and the tabs don’t go down, the wings are not locked. The pilot of this plane must have not pulled the lever and noticed too late, that the red tabs were still up Just as the plane cleared the end of the deck, the wings folded and started to spin around and the plane went into the water with a terrific force. The pilot was unable to get out and that was number 2 lost. The plane disappeared along the side of the carrier and it was difficult to watch what happened. The carrier could not stop and pick him up. Only the destroyer in the back ground had a chance to pick the flyer up, but not much of a chance.

Accidents will happen while flying and this is why you are paid half of your base salary. Other parts the Navy also paid this amount, such as in the submarine service. This was called hazard pay. In my case I was making 150 dollars per month and my hazard pay was 75 dollars.

The ship would like to practice their radar and to do this, they would send a squadron of 8 planes out in the area far enough, about 100 miles and them the planes turn around and attack the carrier from a direction so the carrier could pick them up on their radar. The planes could not attack the carrier, so the ship would put a raft or a platform quite large attached to a cable that would be about a few hundreds yards back of the ship. When the planes came back, they would attack the skid, by dropping bombs and machine gunning it. They would also send out another flight of 8 planes to attack the incoming planes as if they were in combat. This was very dangerous, as many times there would be a collision of some of the planes.

I would be up in the island watching to see the incoming planes and they would always come out of the sun and they were impossible to see. Before you would see the planes, you would hear the bombs going off and the machine guns firing. The attacking planes made a few passes at the skid, when all of a sudden, 2 torpedo planes collided above the skid and both planes hit the water at the same time with a large explosion and 2 pilots and 4 aircrew man died instantly. This makes 4 pilots and 4 aircrew men who were killed in what they called operational fatalities, and not combat. The percentage of operational deaths was like 6 to 1. Before we reached Pearl Harbor another corsair pilot was lost when his engine cut out on take off and could not be reached. This made 9 lives lost in 3 days. If this would continue, the air group would lose all there pilots and aircrew in a couple of months. What was really sad was it wouldn’t be long before the war would be over. This air group would just get to the combat area as the war ended.

As the carrier approached Pearl Harbor, you could see Diamond Head, a famous land mark at Pearl Harbor. The inlet to Ford Island where we were going to dock was very narrow. Ford Island was circled by water and you could go in and out in a circle. As we were about to dock, we passed the USS Arizona and were so close you could almost touch the ship. The super structure was sticking about the water and was getting rusted looking. It was sad to think, that there was over 1000 sailors down there. Docking the USS Wasp was not like bringing a 30 foot sailboat into a birth. They brought the ship in very slow with the help of the tug boats and it was quite a sight to see. The Captain had a lot of responsibility. One miss calculation and he would be doing shore duty. Just as soon as it was docked, the gang planks would be put down and soon after that the crew would be leaving the ship for some fun. As they were leaving, they would salute the officer of the deck and then the flag. This was tradition and no one would leave with out doing this. Some of the sailors would salute very fast in a hurry to get ashore and others would stop and salute in a smart manner and was nice to see. When returning to the ship, you would salute the flag first and the officer of the deck last. The officer of the deck was the one who had a tough job, as he had to salute all the sailors.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter16.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter18.md)
