# Chapter Nineteen: Homeward Bound on the Magic Carpet

We arrived at Pearl Harbor and they immediately gave us quarters on a base at the very highest point in Pearl Harbor. You could see Ford Island and the whole area where the Japanese bombed. There was not a birth vacant in the whole area. Ships were coming back from over seas loaded with soldiers and sailors coming back from the war. There were so many veterans waiting for a ship that it would be a long time before we would be assigned a ship. Our names were put on a list. Ships were going out to the war area to bring back the sailors and soldiers and this was called the ‘MAGIC CARPET’. It was a sight to behold.

I don’t remember how long we waited, but it was a long time. We got a bright idea to go down to the docks and go aboard some of the ships and see if they could put our names on there list to go home. We went down to Ford Island and started to go aboard the ships, one after another. We would go aboard to the Captains quarters where there was a marine with a rifle standing guard in front of the Captains office. We would ask permission to see the Captain and they always let us see him and we would ask if he had any room for 3 guys wanting to go home. After going aboard a number of ships, we came to the USS Hornet and got permission to see the Captain and asked him the same question. To our surprise he said we sure could and he would have the papers make out. I think this cut our waiting time down by a long ways.

I don’t remember the date, but it must have been at least Oct. 15th. In the mean time out air group was notified that they were going to get the USS Bunker Hill. This was sometime after the war had ended and I could not figure out why this was happening. Maybe they thought it was a good way to get the pilots back to the United States. They went aboard the carrier while I and my 2 buddies were waiting on the hill at Pearl Harbor. If I had known this was going to happen, I would have tried to stay with the air group.

As soon as the air group went aboard the USS Bunker Hill, they started flying missions, which was stupid. Jake Apelbaum told me he didn’t know why they had to fly at this time, when all they were going to do was go home. I saw one of the pilots later on at Ford Island and he told me they had an accident in which Ensign Parker was killed. On this flight, he flew on Lt.J.G Daughtey wing, taking my place. As they were coming into the area to break off for their interval for the landing, Ensign Parker pulled over to get in the right echelon prior to breaking off and he tried to be to hot doggish and pulled up into Lt.J.G. Daughter’s prop which cut his tail off. He turned upside down and went into the water and promptly disappeared. Tex also went into the water, but escaped with a damaged arm. He was picked up and taken back to the carrier. This was the last flight before the carrier was to head home. Only one more landing and Ensign Parker would have been safe to go home.

We finally went aboard the USS Hornet ready to go home. The ship was loaded with veterans from all the combat areas. They gave us a cot on the hanger deck. The hanger deck was cots from one end to the other. As the ship was pulling out of the dock, the full United States band was there playing songs. Just as we were leaving the dock, the band was playing Aloha It was so beautiful, it would bring tears to your eyes After that they started to play, San Francisco, here we come and we were on our way.

The trip would take 5 days and on Sunday, we had to listen to all the church services. The trip home was quite boring, as there were so many veterans on the ship, you could hardly move. The band must have been busy for all of the ships leaving to bring the veterans home. It was sad to be leaving Hawaii after 5 months of being at that beautiful place. As you were leaving, you could see Diamond Head Point to the right of Pearl Harbor. Think how happy the soldiers and sailors were finally going home. I know they had notified there parents or relatives that they were coming home. Tyrone Power, a Marine aviator was suppose to be aboard, but I never saw him. There was too many aboard.

After 5 days and as we were nearing San Francisco Harbor, A large ship with a large all girl band followed us all the way playing beautiful music. Also there was an airship that came down, almost touching the deck, and they were playing music. They followed us all the way into the harbor. Someone should have been taking pictures of this, as it was historic.

It was always exciting watching the docking of the ship. We docked at the Air Station, Alameda. When we docked, there were 3 other carriers docked next to us. The area on the dock was full of relatives who were screaming and making so much noise you could hardly hear. The women were crying and going crazy. The veterans were lined up full force along the railing, just waiting for the order to leave. They were all packed and eager to get off. They lowered the gang plank and gave the order that you could leave. As the veterans were leaving the ship, they gave the salute to the officer of the deck and the flag as fast as I have ever seen, and then running down the gang plank.

I know there is film of the historic USS Hornet docking and some still pictures. I had no one meeting me, but I was going to meet my brother-in-law, Fred Conners in San Francisco. He was in the Air force and stationed at Hamilton Field. My brother-in-law had only one eye. When he was a small boy, another kid shot him in the eye with an arrow causing him to lose sight in that eye. This did not stop him at all. He tried to enlist in all of the services, but they would not take him because of his eye problem. Finally, the Air Force drafted him and I know he was really proud of that. When I finally met him, I had to find a place to stay. The entire city was full of veterans and the city put cots in all of the stores and all you had to do was go into one of the stores and grab a cot.

We were downtown, near the St Francis Hotel and next to the Palace hotel and I said to Fred, lets try the Palace Hotel. I went up to the check in desk and said I would like a room. This I cannot believe as they gave me a room that I had to share with a Captain in the Navy. Maybe because I was an officer is the reason I got the room, but I was happy. We went out on the town that evening, but the bars and lounges were so crowded that you could not get waited on. It was some sight to see all of the sailors and soldiers in the streets. I reported to the Navy department to see about transportation to Great Lakes, Illinois, where I was to be discharged, but there was no hurry. All I had to do was get there. They put my name on a list and it looked like it would be a long time to get my travel orders. You had to wait your turn.

Because Fred was stationed at Hamilton Field, he told me why I don’t try to get you on a flight from Hamilton Field going east. That was o.k. with me and finally he succeeded in getting me a flight that was going to leave the next day. We had to leave right then and had no time to check out of the Palace hotel and get my luggage. Fred said he would take care of that and we went to Hamilton field which was not that far away. Then I got a ride to Mather field not far away where I would get a plane going east. I said goodbye to Fred and when I got to Mather field, I got checked into a room in one of the dorms. As soon as the Air Force flyers saw me, they grabbed me and said we were going into Sacramento to have a good time, which we did. They were pilots of B-29 flying fortresses. The next morning, I boarded a C-47 twin engine plane. I found out we were going to Kansas City, Kansas via New Mexico. I had no clothing and especially not a warm coat. There were no seats in the plane, just some items they were taking to Kansas City. I lie on the floor and put my head on some luggage. It was very cold at the altitude they were flying. The first stop was Albuquerque, New Mexico. When I got out of the plane, it felt like I was in a furnace it was so hot. Soon we were on our way to Kansas.

That was as far as the plane was going east. From there I took train to Great Lakes Naval Station, or boot camp. This is where my brother was sent for boot camp in 1941. I was there a couple of days and they gave me a physical. I don’t know why. If I failed, all they could do was kick me out. I think this is the time you can have an injury verified and get an allotment for the rest of your life. Just before I signed the final papers for discharge, they offered me a chance to stay in the Navy with an increase in rank to Lt.J.G. This is one of the major mistakes I ever made. Given a second chance, I would sign in a minute. The only thing left to do was get on a train and go home which I did. This was the end of a very exciting experience.

---
[Previous Chapter](chapter18.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md) | [Next Chapter](chapter20.md)
